  
  
THE  DIAMOND OF  
PERFECT WISDOM  
SUTRA   
  
        
  
金 剛 般 若 波 羅 蜜 經 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by the Chung Tai Translation Committee 
January 2009 
From the Chinese translation by  
Tripitaka Master Kumarajiva, 5th Century 
The follow ing prior English translations were used as references: “The 
Diamond Sutra” by Charles Muller, “The Vajra Prajna Paramita Sutra ” by 
the Buddhist Text Translation Society, “The Diamond Sutra: Transforming 
the Way We Perceive the World ” by Mu Soeng, “The Diamond Sutra” by A. 
F. Price, and “The Diamond Sutra: The Perfection of Wisdom” by Red Pine. 
The Chung Tai Translation Committee comprises of Dharma Masters and lay 
disciples and convenes regularly. To view or download other sutra 
translations by CTTC, visit  “Dharma Gem s” on http://sunnyvale.ctzen.org. 
Comments and suggestions may be sent to translation@ctzen.org  
 
 
 
 
 
Namo Fundamental Teacher Shakyamuni Buddha 
南 無 本 師 釋 迦 牟 尼 佛  
(3 times)（三稱）  
 
 
 
Sutra Opening Verse  
 
The Dhar ma, infinitely profound and subtle,  
Is rarely encountered even in a million kalpas.  
Now we are able to hear , study, and follow it,  
May we fully realize the Tathagata’s true 
meaning.  
 
 
開經偈  
 
無 上 甚 深 微 妙 法  
百 千 萬 劫 難 遭 遇  
我 今 見 聞 得 受 持  
願 解 如 來 真 實 義  
 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra  
1 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom S utra  
金 剛 般 若 波 羅 蜜 經  
 
Chinese translation by Tripitaka Master Kumarajiva  
姚 秦 三 藏 法 師 鳩 摩 羅 什 譯 
 
1.  Convocation of the Assembly 
Thus I have heard. Once, the Buddha was staying in the 
Anathapindada’s Park at Jeta Grove in Shravasti, with a 
community of 1 ,250 bhiksus. When it was mealtime, the World 
Honored One put on his robe, took his  alms-bowl, and went into 
the great city of S hravasti, going from house to house to beg for 
food. This done,  he returned to his abiding place, finished the 
meal, put away his robe and bowl,  washed his feet, arranged his 
seat, and sat down. 
 
法 會 因 由 分 第 一 
如是我聞•一時佛在舍衛國•祇樹給孤獨園•與大比
丘眾•千二百五十人俱•爾時世尊食時•著衣持缽•
入舍衛大城乞食•於其城中•次第乞已•還至本處•
飯食訖•收衣缽•洗足已•敷座而坐• 
 
2. Subhuti Requests the Teaching 
Then, t he elder Subhuti in the assembly arose from his seat, 
bared his right shoulder, knelt on his right knee with his palms 
joined, and respectfully addressed the Buddha: “How 
remarkable, World Honored One , that t he Tathagata is ever -
mindful of bodhisattvas, protecting and instructing them well ! 
World Honored One, when good men and good women  resolve 
to attain unsurpassed comple te enlightenment  (anuttara-samyak-
sambodhi), how should they abide their mind , and how should they 
subdue their thoughts?”  
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
2 
 
The Buddha said, “Excellent! Excellent! Subhuti, it is as you have 
said. The Tathagata is ever-mindful of bodhisattvas, protecting and 
instructing them well. Now listen attentively, and I shall explain 
it for you: G ood men and good women  who resolve to attain 
unsurpassed complete enlightenment  should thus abide and 
subdue their thoughts.”  The Venerable Subhuti  said: “Yes, 
World Honored One. We are listening with great anticipation.”  
 
善 現 啟 請 分 第 二 
時長老須菩提•在大眾中•即從座起•偏袒右肩•右
膝著地•合掌恭敬•而白佛言•希有世尊•如來善護
念諸菩薩•善付囑諸菩薩•世尊•善男子•善女人•
發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心•云何應住•云何降伏其
心•佛言•善哉善哉•須菩提•如汝所說•如來善護
念諸菩薩•善付囑諸菩薩•汝今諦聽•當為汝說•善
男子善女人•發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心•應如是住•
如是降伏其心•唯然•世尊•願樂欲聞• 
 
3. The Bodhisattva Vow 
The Buddha said to Subhuti: “The bodhisattvas and mahasattvas 
should thus subdue their thoughts: All the different types of 
sentient beings, whether they are born from eggs, from womb s, 
from moisture, or by transformation; whether or not the y have 
form; whether they have thoughts  or no thoughts, or h ave 
neither thought nor non -thought, I will liberate them by leading 
them to nirvana without residue. When immeasurable, countless, 
infinite numbers of sentient beings have been liberated, in 
reality, no sentient beings have been liberated. Why is this so?  
Subhuti, if bodhisattvas abide in the notions of a self, a person, a 
sentient being, or a life span, they are not bodhisattvas.” 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
3 
 
大 乘 正 宗 分 第 三 
佛告須菩提•諸菩薩摩訶薩•應如是降伏其心•所有
一切眾生之類•若卵生•若胎生•若濕生•若化生•
若有色•若無色•若有想•若無想•  若非有想非無
想•我皆令入無餘涅槃而滅度之•如是滅度無量無數
無邊眾生•實無眾生得滅度者•何以故•須菩提•若
菩薩有我相•人相•眾生相•壽者相•即非菩薩• 
 
4. Unattached Practice of Charity 
 “Furthermore, Subhuti, in the practice of charity,  bodhisattvas 
should abide in nothing  whatsoever. That is, to practice charity 
without attachment to  form, sound, smell , taste, touch, or 
dharmas. Subhuti, bodhisattvas should practice charity this way, 
without attachment to anything . Why? If bodhisattvas practice 
charity without attachment , their merits are immeasurable. 
Subhuti, what do you think? Is the space in the eastern direction 
measurable?” “No, World Honored One, it is immeasurable.” 
“Subhuti, is any of the space  above or below,  in the four 
cardinal directions, or in the four intermediate directions 
measurable?” “They are immeasurable, World Honored One.”  
 
“Subhuti, the merits attained by bo dhisattvas who practice 
charity without attachment are also immeasurable like space.  
Subhuti, bodhisattvas should abide in this teaching.” 
 
妙 行 無 住 分 第 四 
復次須菩提•菩薩於法•應無所住•行於布施• 所謂
不住色布施•不住聲香味觸法布施•須菩提•菩薩應
如是布施•不住於相•何以故•若菩薩不住相布施•
其福德不可思量•須菩提 •於意云何•東方虛空可思
量不•不也•世尊•須菩提•南西北 方•四維上下虛 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
4 
 
空•可思量不•不也•世尊•須菩提•菩薩無住相布
施•福德亦復如是不可思量•須菩提•菩薩但應如所
教住• 
 
5. Physical Attributes of Buddhahood 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Can one recognize the Tathagata 
by means of his physical appearance? ” “No, World Honored 
One. One cannot recognize the Tathagata  by his physical 
appearance. Why not? The Tathagata teaches that physical  
appearances are actually not physical appearances.” The Buddha 
said to Subhuti: “All appearances are illusory. To see that 
appearances are not appearances is to see the Tathagata.” 
 
如 理 實 見 分 第 五 
須菩提•於意云何•可以身相見如來不• 不也•世
尊•不可以身相得見如來•何以故• 如 來 所 說 身
相 • 即 非 身 相 • 佛 告 須 菩 提 •凡所有相•皆是虛
妄•若見諸相非相•即見如來•  
 
6. The Merit of True Faith 
Subhuti addressed the Buddha, “World Honored One, will there 
be any sentient beings who give rise to true faith upon hearing 
this teaching?” The Buddha said to Subhuti , “Do not even say 
such a thing. After my passing, in the last five hundred years [of 
the Dharma ending age] , there will be those who observe the 
precepts and cultivate merit, who have faith that these are words 
of truth.  You shoul d know that these people have not merely 
cultivated the root s of virtue  with one buddha, two buddhas, 
three, four, or five buddhas ; they have cultivated all kinds of 
virtuous roots with hundreds of thousands, even countless 
numbers of buddhas. Upon hearing  these passages,  Subhuti, 
some will , in an instant, give rise to pure faith. The Tathagata  
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
5 
 
fully knows and fully sees these beings as they attain such 
countless merits. Why? It is because these sentient beings are 
free from the notions of a self, a perso n, a sentient being, or a 
life span. They are also free from the notions of dharmas or non-
dharmas.  
 
“Why? If the minds of these sentient beings cherish these 
notions, then they will cling to a self, a person, a sentient being, 
and a life  span. If they ch erish the notion of dharmas, they will 
cling to a self, a person, a sentient being, and a life span. Why? 
If they cherish the notion of non -dharmas, they will cling to a 
self, a person, a sentient being, and a life span. Therefore one 
should not cherish dharmas or non-dharmas. For this reason, the 
Tathagata often teaches: Bhiksus, know that my Dharma is like 
a raft. If even the correct teachings (Dharma)  should be 
abandoned, how much more so the incorrect teachings (non -
Dharma)?” 
 
正 信 希 有 分 第 六 
須菩提白佛言•世尊•頗有眾生• 得聞如是言說章
句•生實信不•佛告須菩提•莫作是說•如來滅後•
後五百歲•有持戒修福者•於此章句•能生信心•以
此為實•當知是人•不於一佛二佛三四五佛而種善
根•已於無量千萬佛所•種諸善根•聞是章句•乃至
一念生淨信者•須菩提•如來悉知悉見•是諸眾生•
得如是無量福德•何以故•是諸眾生•無復我相•人
相•眾生相•壽者相•無法相•亦無非法相• 
 
何以故•是諸眾生•若心取相•即為著我人眾生壽
者•若取法相•即著我人眾生壽者•何以故• 若取非
法相•即著我人眾生壽者•是故不應取法• 不應取非
法•以是義故•如來常說• 汝等比丘•知我說法•如
筏喻者•法尚應捨•何況非法• 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
6 
 
7. No Attainment, No Teaching 
 “Subhuti, what do you  think? Has the Tathagata  attained 
unsurpassed complete enlightenment? And does he explain the 
Dharma?” Subhuti said: “As I understand the meaning of what 
the Budd ha has said, there is no fixed teaching  called 
unsurpassed complete enlightenment. And there is also no fixed 
teaching that the Tathagata can convey . Why? The Dharma 
explained by the Tathagata  cannot be grasped or explained.  
They are neither Dharmas nor non-Dharmas. How is this so ? It 
is because all  the saints and sages are distinguished by the 
Unconditioned Dharma.” 
 
無 得 無 說 分 第 七 
須菩提•於意云何•如來得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提耶•
如來有所說法耶•須菩提言•如我解佛所說義•無有
定法•名阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•亦無有定法•如來可
說•何以故•如來所說法•皆不可取•不可說•非
法•非非法•所以者何•一切賢聖•皆以無為法而有
差別• 
 
8. Real Merit Has No Merit 
“Subhuti, what do you think? If a person fill s a trichiliocosm 
with the seven jewels and give s them away in charity, wouldn’t 
the merit attained by this person be great? ” Subhuti said, 
“Extremely great, World Honored One. Why? The nature of 
merit is empty; therefore the Tathagata says that this merit is 
great.” The Buddha said: “But if a person comprehends  and 
follows even a four -line verse of  this sutra, and teaches it to 
others, this person’s merit would exceed that of the former 
example. Why? Subhuti, all buddhas and all of their teachings 
on unsurpassed complete enlightenment originate from this 
sutra.  Subhuti, that which is called th e Buddha Dharma is not 
the Buddha Dharma; therefore it is called the Buddha Dharma.” 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
7 
 
依 法 出 生 分 第 八 
須菩提•於意云何•若人滿三千大千世界七寶•以用
布施•是人所得福德•寧為多不•須菩提言•甚多•
世尊•何以故•是福德•即非福德性•是故如來說福
德多•若復有人•於此經中•受持乃至四句偈等•為
他人說•其福勝彼•何以故• 須菩提•一切諸佛•及
諸佛阿耨多羅三藐三菩提法•皆 從此經出•須菩提•
所謂佛法者•即非佛法•是名佛法• 
 
9. The Four Stages of an Arhat 
 “Subhuti, what do you th ink? Does a  srotapanna have the 
thought: ‘I have attained the realization of the srotapanna ’?” 
Subhuti said, “No, World Honored One. Why not? Because 
‘srotapanna’ means ‘stream-enterer,’ and there is in fact nothing 
to enter; one who does not enter into form, sound, smell, taste, 
touch, or dharmas is called a srotapanna.”  
 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Does a sak ridagamin have the 
thought, ‘I have attained the realization of the sakridagamin’?” 
Subhuti said: “No, World Honored One. Why not? Although 
‘sakridagamin’ means to go and come one more time, there is, 
in reality, no going and no coming. Therefore he is called a 
sakridagamin.”  
 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Does an anag amin have the 
thought, ‘I have attained the realization of the anagamin ’?” 
Subhuti said, “No, World Honored One. Why not?  ‘Anagamin’ 
means non-returning [to the human world ], but there is, in fact, 
no such thing as non -returning. Therefore he is called an  
anagamin.”  
 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Does an arhat have the thought, ‘I 
have attained the realization o f the arhat’?”  Subhuti said, “No, 
World Honored One. Why not? There is, in reality, no such a  
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
8 
  
thing called ‘arhat.’ World Honored One, if an arhat should give 
rise to the thought, ‘I have attained the realization of the arhat’, 
this means that he is attached to the notions of a self, a person, a 
sentient being, or a life span.  
 
“World Honored One, you have said that of all people I am the 
foremost in attaining the samadhi of non -contention, and the 
foremost arhat in being free from desire s. But I do not have the 
thought that I am an arhat who is free from desire s. World 
Honored One, if I give rise to the thought that I have attained 
arhatship, then you would not have said that Subhuti practices 
aranya—abiding peacefully in non -contention. In reality, 
Subhuti abides in nothing  at all, therefore Subhuti is called one 
who abides peacefully in non-contention.” 
 
一 相 無 相 分 第 九 
須菩提•於意云何•須陀洹能作是念•我得須陀洹果
不•須菩提言•不也•世 尊•何以故•須陀洹名為入
流•而無所入•不入色聲香味觸法•是名須陀洹•  
須菩提•於意云何• 斯陀含能作是念• 我得斯陀含
果不•須菩提言•不也• 世尊• 何以故•斯陀含名
一往來•而實無往來•是名斯陀含•須菩提•於意云
何•阿那含能作是念•我得阿那含果不•須菩提言•
不也•世尊• 何以故• 阿那含名為不來•而實無不
來•是故名阿那含• 
 
須菩提•於意云何• 阿羅漢能作是念• 我得阿羅漢
道不•須菩提言•不也 •世尊•何以故•實無有法•
名阿羅漢•世尊•若阿羅漢作是念•我得阿羅漢道•
即為著我人眾生壽者•世尊•佛說我得無諍三昧• 人
中最為第一•是第一離欲阿羅漢•世尊•我不作是
念•我是離欲阿羅漢•世尊•我若作是念•我得阿羅
漢道•世尊則不說須菩提•是樂阿蘭那行者•以須菩
提實無所行•而名須菩提•是樂阿蘭那行• 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
9 
 
10. Transformation to a Buddha World 
The Buddha said to Subhuti , “What do you think? When the 
Tathagata studied under Dipan kara Buddha, did he receive any 
Dharma?” “N o, World Honored One,  when the Tathagata  
studied under D ipankara Buddha, he did not receive any 
Dharma.” “Subhuti, what do you think? Does a bodhisattva 
transform a world into a  Buddha world? ” “No, he does not, 
World Honored One. Why not?  One who transform s the world 
does not transform the world; that is to transform the world.”  
 
“And so, Subhuti, bodhisattvas and mahasattvas should give rise 
to a pure mind that is not attached to form , sound, smell, taste , 
touch, or dharmas. The mind should act without an y 
attachments. Subhuti, if there were a person with a body the size 
of Mt. Sumeru, what do you think? Would n’t this body be 
huge?” “Extremely huge, World Honored One. Why? The 
Buddha teaches us that a body is not a body, hence it is called a 
huge body.” 
 
莊 嚴 淨 土 分 第 十 
佛告須菩提•於意云何•如來昔在然燈佛所• 於法有
所得不•不也•世尊•如來在然燈佛所•於法實無所
得•須菩提•於意云何•菩薩莊嚴佛土不• 不也•世
尊•何以故•莊嚴佛土者•即非莊嚴• 是名莊嚴•是
故須菩提•諸菩薩摩訶薩•應如是生清淨心•不應住
色生心•不應住聲香味觸法生心•  應無所住而生其
心•須菩提•譬如有人•身如須彌山王•於意云何•
是身為大不•須菩提言•甚大•世尊•何以故•佛說
非身•是名大身• 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
10 
 
11. Merits of this Sutra 
“Subhuti, what do you think?  If there were as many Ganges 
Rivers as the grains of sand in the Ganges, would n’t the amount 
of sand contained in all those Ganges Rivers be great?” Subhuti 
said, “Extremely great, World Honored One. If even the number 
of the Ganges Rivers is innumerable, how much more so their 
grains of sand?” “Subhuti, now I tell you truthfully: If a good 
man or good woman fills as many trichiliocosms as the grains of 
sand in all those Ganges Rivers with the seven jewels, and gives 
them away in charity, would n’t this mer it be great?”  
“Extremely great, World Honored One.” The Buddha said to 
Subhuti: “If a good man or good woman is able to comprehend 
and follow a four -line verse of this sutra and teach it to others, 
their merit will be far greater.” 
 
無 為 福 勝 分 第 十 一 
須菩提•如恆河中所有沙數• 如是沙等恆河•於意云
何•是諸恆河沙•寧為多不•須菩提言•甚多•世
尊•但諸恆河•尚多無數•何況其沙•須菩提•我今
實言告汝•若有善男子善女人•以七寶滿爾所恆河沙
數三千大千世界•以用布施•得福多不•須菩提言•
甚多•世尊•佛告須菩提•若善男子善女人•於此經
中•乃至受持四句偈等•為他人說•而此福德•  勝
前福德• 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
11 
 
12. The Most Extraordinary Merit 
“Furthermore, Subhuti, wherever one teaches or recites so much 
as a f our-line verse of this sutra, that place should be venerated 
as a Buddha -shrine by heavenly beings, human beings, and 
asuras in this world. How much more so is the case where one 
can completely remember, comprehend, and follow this sutra ! 
Subhuti, you shou ld know that such a person has achieved the 
highest, rarest of accomplishments.  Wherever this  sutra is 
present, it is as if the Buddha and the Buddha’s revered disciples 
were also present.” 
 
尊 重 正 教 分 第 十 二 
復次須菩提•隨說是經•乃至四句偈等•當知此處•
一切世間天人阿修羅•皆應供養•如佛塔廟•何況有
人•盡能受持讀誦•須菩提•當知是人•成就最上第
一希有之法•若是經典所在之處•即為有佛•若尊重
弟子• 
 
13. Naming of the Sutra 
Then Subhuti addressed the Buddha , “World Honored One, 
what should we call this sutra, and how should we uphold it?” 
The Buddha said to Subhuti: “This sutra is called the Diamond 
of Perfect Wisdom. You should revere this title and practice the 
sutra accordingly. Why? Subhuti, the Buddha teaches that 
‘prajna paramita’ (perfection of wisdom) is not prajna paramita. 
Therefore it is called prajna paramita. Subhuti, what do you 
think? Does the Tathagata have any Dharma to teach?” Subhuti 
said to the Buddha, “World Honored One, the Tathagata has 
nothing to teach.” “Subhuti, what do you think? Are all the tiny 
particles contained in this  trichiliocosm great in number?” 
Subhuti said, “Extremely great, World Honored One.” “Subhuti, 
the Tathagata teaches that tiny particles are not tiny particles.  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
12 
 
Therefore they are called tiny particles. The Tathagata teaches 
that worlds are not worlds. Therefore they are called worlds.  
 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Can the Tathagata be recognized 
by means of his thirty -two physical attributes?” “No, he cannot, 
World Honored One. One cannot recognize the Tathagata by 
means of his thirty -two physical attr ibutes. Why not? Because 
the Tathagata teaches that the thirty -two physical attributes are 
in fact not real attributes. Therefore they are called the thirty -
two physical attributes.” “Subhuti, if a good man or good 
woman dedicates lifetimes as numerous as the grains of sand in 
the Ganges River to charitable acts, and another comprehend s 
and follows even a four -line verse of this sutra and taught it to 
others, the merits gained by the latter would far exceed that of 
the former.” 
 
如 法 受 持 分 第 十 三 
爾時須菩提白佛言•世尊•當何名此經•我等云何奉
持•佛告須菩提•是經名為金剛般若波羅蜜•以是名
字•汝當奉持•所以者何•須菩提•佛說般若波羅
蜜•即非般若波羅蜜•是名般若波羅蜜•須菩提•於
意云何•如來有所說法不 •須菩提白佛言•世尊•如
來無所說•須菩提•於意云何•三千大千世界•所有
微塵•是為多不•須菩提言•甚多•世尊•須菩提•
諸微塵•如來說非微塵•是名微塵•如來說世界•非
世界•是名世界• 
 
須菩提•於意云何•可以三十二相見如來不•不也•
世尊•不可以三十二相得見如來•何以故•如來說三
十二相•即是非相•是名三十二相•須菩提•若有善
男子善女人•以恆河沙等身命布施•若復有人•於此
經中•乃至受持四句偈等•為他人說•其福甚多• 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
13 
 
14. A Mind Without Attachments 
Upon hearing this sermon, Subhuti was moved to tears, having 
deeply understood its meaning and significance.  He said to the 
Buddha: “How remarkable, World Honored  One! You have 
taught us such a profound sutra.  Even though I have long 
attained the Wisdom Eye, I have never heard such a teaching 
before. World Honored One, if someone who hears this sutra 
gives rise to pure faith, and thus perceives the true nature of 
reality, we should know that this person has achieved the most 
extraordinary virtue. World Honored One, the true nature of 
reality is empty. This is what the Tathagata calls the true nature 
of reality. 
 
“World Honored One, having just heard this sutra, I ha ve no 
difficulty in believing, comprehending, and following it. But in the 
ages to come, in the last five hundred years, if there are sentient 
beings who hear this sutra, believe, comprehend, and follow it, 
they will be most remarkable beings. Why? These b eings do not 
abide in the notions of a self, a person, a sentient being, or a life 
span. Why? Because a self is not a self. The appearance s of a 
person, a sentient being, and a life span are likewise illusory. 
Why? Those who relinquish all appearances and notions are 
called buddhas.”  
 
The Buddha said to Subhuti: “So it is, so it is. You should know 
that if someone who hears the teaching of this sutra is neither 
shocked, frightened, nor disturbed, this person is extremely rare. 
And why? Subhuti, the Tathaga ta says that the foremost 
paramita is not the foremost paramita. Therefore it is called the 
foremost paramita. Subhuti, the Tathagata teaches that tolerance 
paramita is not tolerance paramita. Therefore it is called 
tolerance paramita. Why? Subhuti, in a former lifetime my body 
was mutilated by King Kalinga. At that time, I had no notions  
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
14 
 
of a self, a person, a  sentient being, or a life span. Why not? If I 
had held to the notions of a self, a person, a sentient being, or a 
life span, when my body was dism embered limb after limb, I 
would have given rise to feelings of resentment and hatred.  
 
“Subhuti, I also recall that for five hundred lifetimes I was a 
rishi of tolerance. At that time, I was also free from the notions 
of a self, a person, a sentient bein g, or a life span. Therefore, 
Subhuti, bodhisattvas should relinquish all appearances and 
notions in their resolve to attain unsurpassed complete 
enlightenment. They shoul d not give rise to any thought 
attached to  form, sound, smell, taste, touch, or dharma. They 
should give rise to a mind without any attachments . Any 
attachment of the mind is errant. Therefore the Buddha says that 
a bodhisattva should practice charity with a mind unattached to 
form. Subhuti, to benefit all sentient beings, a bodhisattva 
should practice charity in this way . The Tathagata teaches that 
all appearances and notions are not appearances and notions, 
and that all sentient beings are not sentient beings. 
 
“Subhuti, what the Tathagata speaks is true , real, and as it is.  
His words are  neither deceptive nor contradictory. Subhuti, the 
Truth that the Tathagata has attained is neither real nor unreal.  
Subhuti, if a bodhisattva practices charity with attachments, he 
is like a person in the dark who cannot see any thing. If a 
bodhisattva practices charity without any attachments, he is like 
a person under the bright sun with eyes open, seeing all things 
clearly. Subhuti, if in a future time there are good men and 
women who are able to recite, remember, comprehend, and 
follow this s utra, the Tathagata, with his Buddha-wisdom, will 
clearly perceive and recognize each one of them as they all 
achieve immeasurable and infinite virtues.” 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
15 
 
離 相 寂 滅 分 第 十 四 
爾時須菩提•聞說是經•深解義趣•涕淚悲泣•而白
佛言•希有世尊•佛說如是甚深經典•我從昔來•所
得慧眼•未曾得聞如是之經•世尊•若復有人•得聞
是經•信心清淨•即生實相•當知是人•成就第一希
有功德•世尊•是實相者•即是非相•是故如來說名
實相•世尊•我今得聞如是經典•信解受持•不足為
難•若當來世•後五百歲•其有眾生•得聞是經•信
解受持•是人即為第一希有•何以故•此人無我相•
無人相•無眾生相•無壽者相•所以者何•我相即是
非相•人相•眾生相•壽者相•即是非相•何以故•
離一切諸相•即名諸佛• 
 
佛告須菩提•如是如是•若復有人•得聞是經•不驚
不怖不畏•當知是人•甚為希有•何以故•須菩提•
如來說第一波羅蜜•即非第一波羅蜜•是名第一波羅
蜜•須菩提•忍辱波羅蜜•如來說非忍辱波羅蜜•是
名忍辱波羅蜜•何以故•須菩提•如我昔為歌利王割
截身體•我於爾時•無我相•無人相•無眾生相•無
壽者相•何以故•我於往昔節節支解時•若有我相•
人相•眾生相•壽者相•應生瞋恨• 
 
須菩提 •又念過去於五百世 •作忍辱仙人 •於爾所
世•無我相 •無人相 •無眾生相 •無壽者相 •是故須
菩提•菩薩應離一切相 •發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心 •
不應住色生心 •不應住聲香味 觸法生心•應生無所住
心•若心有住 •即為非住 •是故佛說菩薩心 •不應住
色布施•須菩提•菩薩為利益一切眾生故 •應如是布
施•如來說一切諸相 •即是非相 •又說一切眾生 •即
非眾生 •須菩提 •如來是真語者 •實語者 •如語者 •
不誑語者•不異語者•須菩提 •如來所得法 •此法無
實無虛 •須菩提 •若菩薩心住於法 •而行布施 •如人
入闇•即無所見•若菩薩心不住法•而行布施•如人 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
16 
 
有目•日光明照•見種種色•須菩提•當來之世•若有
善男子善女人 •能於此經受持讀誦 •即為如來以佛智
慧•悉知是人•悉見是人•皆得成就無量無邊功德• 
 
15. The Sutra Is a Supreme Vehicle 
“Subhuti, if a good man or good woman renounces their life for 
charity in the morning as many times as there are grains o f sand 
in the Ganges, and  does likewise at noon and in the evening,  
continuing thus for immeasurable hundreds o f thousands of 
millions of kalpas; and if someone else hear s this teaching and 
gives rise to unwavering faith, the merit of the latter would far 
exceed that of the former.  How much more the merit of those 
who transcribe, recite, remember, follow, and explain this sutra 
to others!  
 
“In summary, Subhuti, this  sutra carries inconceivable, 
immeasurable, limitless virtue, and the Tathagata  teaches it for 
the benefit of the aspirants of the great vehicle, and the aspirants 
of the supreme vehicle.  The Tathagata will know and see those,  
who are able to recite, remember, follow, and widely teach this 
sutra to others, as achieving innumerable, immeasurable, 
limitless, and inconceivable virtues. They carry on the work of  
the Tathagata in bringing beings to unsurpassed  complete 
enlightenment. Why? Subhuti,  those who are content with 
inferior teachings are attached to the view s of a self, a person, a 
sentient being, and a life span.  Such people are not able to hear, 
recite, remember, and explain this s utra to others. Sub huti, 
wherever this sutra is present, all the heavenly and human beings 
and asuras in all the worlds should come and make offerings. You 
should know that its presence  is equivalent to a pagoda that all 
should venerate and pay homage to,  by circumambulating or 
scattering flowers and incense around its grounds.” 
 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
17 
 
持 經 功 德 分 第 十 五 
須菩提•若有善男子善女人•初日分•以恆河沙等身
布施•中日分•復以恆河沙等身布施•後日分•亦以
恆河沙等身布施•如是無量百千萬億劫•以身布施•
若復有人聞此經典•信心不逆•其福勝彼•何況書寫
受持讀誦•為人解說•須菩提•以要言之•是經有不
可思議•不可稱量•無邊功德•如來為發大乘者說•
為發最上乘者說•若有人能受持讀誦•廣為人說•如
來悉知是人•悉見是人•皆得成就不可量•不可稱•
無有邊•不可思議功德•如是人等•即為荷擔如來阿
耨多羅三藐三菩提•何以故•須菩提•若樂小法者•
著我見•人見•眾生見•壽者見•即於此經•不能聽
受讀誦•為人解說•須菩提•在在處處•若有此經•
一切世間天人阿修羅•所應供養•當知此處•即為是
塔•皆應恭敬•作禮圍繞•以諸華香•而散其處• 
 
16. Purgation of Bad Karma 
“Furthermore, Subhuti , if there are good men or women  who 
recite, remember, comprehend, and fo llow this sutra, but are 
belittled by others, it is because of their previous evil karma,  
which would cause them to be reborn in the wretched destinies . 
But now, by enduring the disparagement of others, this previous 
bad karma is eradicated, and they will eventually attain 
unsurpassed complete enlightenment. Subhuti , I remember  that 
countless kalpas ago, before the time of Dipankara  Buddha, I 
have encountered 84,000  billion nayutas of buddhas, made 
offerings to , and served all of them without fail. However, if 
someone in the Dharma -ending age can recite, remember, 
comprehend, and follow this sutra, this person’s virtue will be one 
hundred times, even a hundred trillion times greater  than mine 
when I made offerings to all these buddhas.  In fact, no such  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
18 
 
comparison either by calculation or analogy is possible. Subhuti,  
if I fully reveal  the virtue attained  by good men and good 
women in the Dharma -ending age who recite, remember, 
comprehend, and follow this sutra, some people, upon hearing it, 
would become s uspicious, skeptical, even bewildered.  Subhuti, 
you should know that the underlying meaning of this sutra is 
inconceivable, and its rewards are also inconceivable.”  
 
能 淨 業 障 分 第 十 六 
復次須菩提•若善男子善女人•受持讀誦此經•若為
人輕賤•是人先世罪業•應墮惡道•以今世人輕賤
故•先世罪業•即為消滅•當得阿耨多羅三藐三菩
提•須菩提•我念過去•無量 阿僧祇劫•於然燈佛
前•得值八百四千萬億那由他諸佛•悉皆供養承事•
無空過者•若復有人•於後末世•能受持讀誦此經•
所得功德•於我所供養諸佛功德•百分不及一•千萬
億分•乃至算數譬喻所不能及•須菩提•若善男子善
女人•於後末世•有受持讀誦此經•所得功德•我若
具說者•或有人聞•心即狂亂•狐疑不信•須菩提•
當知是經義不可思議•果報亦不可思議• 
 
17. All Dharmas Are Non-Dharmas 
Then Subhuti  addressed the Buddha , “World Honored One, if  
good men and good women resolve to attain unsurpassed 
complete enlightenment, how should they abide their mind , and 
how should they subdue their thoughts?”  The Buddha said to 
Subhuti: “Good men and good women who resolve to attain 
unsurpassed complete enl ightenment should think like this: ‘I 
will liberate all sentient beings  by bringing them to nirvana .’ 
Yet when all senti ent beings have been liberated , not a single 
sentient being has actually attained nirvana. Why not? Subhuti, if  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
19 
 
bodhisattvas abide in the notions of a self, a person, a sentient 
being, or a life span, they are not bodhisattvas. Why? Subhuti, there 
is actually no resolve for the attainment of  unsurpassed complete 
enlightenment.  
 
“Subhuti, what do you think? When the Tathagata  met 
Dipankara Buddha, did he  obtain anything in order to realize  
unsurpassed complete enlightenment?”  “No, World Honored 
One. As I understand the meaning of your teaching, when you 
met Dipankara Buddha, there was nothing to obtain for  the 
realization of  unsurpassed complete enlightenment.”  The 
Buddha said, “So it is, Subhuti, so it is. There is indeed nothing 
that can produce the unsurpassed complete enlightenment of the 
Tathagata. Subhuti, if ther e were something that could produce  
the unsurpassed complete enlighten ment of the Tathagata , 
Dipankara Buddha would not have foretold , ‘You will attain 
Buddhahood in the future, with the name Shakyamuni.’ It is 
precisely because there is actually nothing to be obtained in 
unsurpassed complete enlightenment that Dipankara Bud dha 
foretold, ‘You will attain Buddhahood in the future, with the 
name Shakyamuni.’  
 
Why? This is because ‘tathagata’ means ‘all phenomena 
(dharmas) as they really are.’ If someone says that the Tathagata 
attained unsurpassed complete enlightenment, Subhuti, there is 
in fact, nothing to attain in the Buddha’s  unsurpassed complete 
enlightenment. Subhuti, the unsurpassed complete enlightenment 
attained by the Tathagata is neither real nor unreal. Therefore the 
Tathagata teaches that all dharmas are the Buddh a Dharma. 
Subhuti, the so-called ‘all dharmas ’ are not dharmas at all. 
Therefore they are called ‘all dharmas.’  
 
“Subhuti, take the example of a person with an immense, perfect 
body.” Subhuti said, “World Honored One, the person with the  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
20 
 
immense, perfect body has no such body; therefore it is called 
an immense, perfect body.” “Subhuti , so it is with a bodhisattva. 
If someone says, ‘I will bring countless sentient beings to 
nirvana,’ then he is not a bodhisattva. W hy? Subhuti , there is 
actually no such thing called a bodhisattva . Therefore the 
Buddha says that all phenomena are free from the ideas of a self, 
a person, a sentient being, or a life span.  Subhuti, if a 
bodhisattva says ‘I will transform the world into a Buddha  
world,’ then he is not a bodhisa ttva. Why? The Tathagata  
teaches that one who transforms the world  is not the one who 
transforms the world. That is to transform the world. Subhuti, if 
a bodhisattva realizes the Dharma of non -self, the Tathagata  
says this is a real bodhisattva.” 
 
究 竟 無 我 分 第 十 七 
爾時須菩提白佛言•世尊•善男子善女人•發阿耨多
羅三藐三菩提心•云何應住•云何降伏其心•佛告須
菩提•善男子善女人•發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心者•
當生如是心•我應滅度一切眾生•滅度一切眾生已•
而無有一眾生實滅度者•何以故•須菩提•若菩薩有
我相•人相•眾生相•壽者相•即非菩薩•所以者
何•須菩提•實無有法•發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心
者• 
 
須菩提•於意云何•如來於然燈佛所•有法得阿耨多
羅三藐三菩提不•不也•世尊•如我解佛所說義•佛
於然燈佛所•無有法•得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•佛
言•如是如是•須菩提•實無有法•如來得阿耨多羅
三藐三菩提•須菩提•若有法• 如來得阿耨多羅三
藐三菩提者•然燈佛即不與我授記•汝於來世•當
得作佛•號釋迦牟尼•以實無有法• 得阿耨多羅三
藐三菩提•是故然燈佛與我授記•作是言•汝於來  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
21 
 
世•當得作佛•號釋迦牟尼•何以故•如來者•即諸
法如義•若有人言•如來得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•須
菩提•實無有法•佛得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•須菩
提•如來所得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•於是中無實無
虛•是故如來說一切法•皆是佛法•須菩提•所言一
切法者•即非一切法•是故名一切法• 
 
須菩提•譬如人身長大•須菩提言•世尊•如來說人
身長大•即為非大身•是名大身•須菩提•菩薩亦如
是•若作是言•我當滅度無量眾生•即不名菩薩•何
以故•須菩提•實無有法•名為菩薩•是故佛說一切
法•無我•無人•無眾生•無壽者•須菩提•若菩薩
作是言•我當莊嚴佛土•是不名菩薩•何以故•如來
說莊嚴佛土者•即非莊嚴•是名莊嚴•須菩提•若菩
薩通達無我法者•如來說名真是菩薩• 
 
18. All Thoughts Are Intangible 
 “Subhuti, what do you think? Does the Tathagata  have the 
physical eye?” “Yes, World Honored One. The Tathagata  has the 
physical eye. ” “Subhuti, what do you think? Does the Tathagata 
have the divine eye? ” “Yes, World Honored One, the Tathagata  
has the divine eye. ” “Subhuti, what do you think? Does  the 
Tathagata have the wisd om eye?” “Yes, World Honored One, the 
Tathagata has the wisdom eye. ” “Subhuti, what do you think? 
Does the Tathagata have the Dharma eye?”  “Yes, World Honored 
One. The Tathagata  has the Dharma eye.” “Subhuti, what do you 
think? Does the Tathagata have the  Buddha eye? ” “Yes, World 
Honored One. The Tathagata has the Buddha eye.” “Subhuti, what 
do you think? Does the Buddha consider all the sand in the 
Ganges River as sand?”  “Yes, World Honored One, the Tathagata  
calls it ‘sand.’” “Subhuti, what do you think? If there were as  
 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
22 
 
many Ganges Rivers as there are grains of sand in the Ganges 
River, and there were a Buddha world for each grain  of sand of all 
those rivers, would the number of those Buddha worlds be great?” 
“Great indeed, World Honored One.”  
 
The Buddha said to Subhuti : “The Tathagata is fully aware of the 
thoughts of each sentient being dwelling in all these Buddha worlds. 
How is it so? The Tathagata says all these thoughts are not thoughts. 
Therefore they are called thoughts. Why, S ubhuti? Becaus e p ast 
thoughts are intangible, present thoughts are intangible, and future 
thoughts are intangible.” 
 
一 體 同 觀 分 第 十 八 
須菩提•於意云何•如來有肉眼不•如是•世尊•如
來有肉眼•須菩提•於意云何•如來有天眼不•如
是•世尊•如來有天眼•須菩提•於意云何•如來有
慧眼不•如是•世尊•如來有慧眼•須菩提•於意云
何•如來有法眼不•如是•世尊•如來有法眼•須菩
提•於意云何•如來有佛眼不•如是•世尊•如來有
佛眼•須菩提•於意云何• 如恆河中所有沙•佛說是
沙不•如是•世尊•如來說是沙•須菩提•於意云
何•如一恆河中所有沙•有如是沙等恆河•是諸恆河
所有沙數佛世界•如是寧為多不•甚多•世尊•佛告
須菩提•爾所國土中 • 所有眾生•若干種心•如來
悉知•何以故•如來說諸心•皆為非心•是名為心•
所以者何•須菩提•過去心不可得•現在心不可得•
未來心不可得• 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
23 
 
19. No Merit Is Great Merit 
“Subhuti, what do you think? If a person fill s all the worlds of 
the trichiliocosm with the seven jewels and gives them all away 
in charity, wouldn’t this person’s mer it be great?”  “Yes, World 
Honored One, this person’s merit from such an act would be 
extremely great.” “Subhuti, if this merit were real, the Tathagata 
would not say that there is great merit. It is because this merit is 
non-existent that the Tathagata says that the merit is great.”  
 
法 界 通 化 分 第 十 九 
須菩提•於意云何•若有人滿三千大千世界七寶•以
用布施•是人以是因緣•得福多不•如是•世尊•此
人以是因緣•得福甚多•須菩提•若福德有實•如來
不說得福德多•以福德無故•如來說得福德多• 
 
20. Transcending Physical Attributes 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Can the Buddha be recognized by 
means of his perfect physical body?” “No, World Honored One. 
The Tathagata  cannot be recognized by means of his perfect 
physical body. Why? The Tathagata teaches  that a perfect 
physical body is not a perfect physical body, hence it is called a 
perfect physical body .”  “Subhuti, what do you think? Can the 
Tathagata be recognized by means of  his perfect attributes? ” 
“No, World Honored One. The Tathagata  cannot be recognized 
by means of  his perfect attributes . Why? The Tathagata teaches 
that ‘perfect attributes’ are actually not perfect attributes. Therefore 
they are called perfect attributes.” 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
24 
 
離 色 離 相 分 第 二 十 
須菩提•於意云何•佛可以具足色身見不•不也•世
尊•如來不應以具足色身見•何以故•如來說具足色
身•即非具足色身•是名具足色身•須菩提•於意云
何•如來可以具足諸相見不•不也•世尊•如來不應
以具足諸相見•何以故•如來說諸相具足•即非具
足•是名諸相具足• 
 
21. There Is No Dharma to Teach 
 “Subhuti, do not think that  the Tathagata holds the thou ght ‘I 
have something to teach. ’ Do not even think such a thing. Wh y 
not? Whoever says that the Tathagata  has a Dharma to teach 
slanders the Buddha, because he does not understand my 
teaching. Subhuti, in teaching the Dharma there is no Dharma to 
teach. Th is is called teaching th e Dharma.” Then the wise 
Venerable Subhuti said to the Buddha: “World Honored One , 
will there be sentient beings in the future [during the Dharma 
ending age ] who will generate faith upon hearing these 
teachings?” The Buddha said: “Subhuti, they are neither sentient 
beings nor non -sentient beings. Why? Subhuti , the Tathagata 
teaches that sentient beings, who go through many births, are 
not sentient beings. Therefore they are called sentient beings.” 
 
非 說 所 說 分 第 二 十 一 
須菩提•汝勿謂如來作是念•我當有所說法•莫作是
念•何以故•若人言如來有所說法•即為謗佛•不能
解我所說故•須菩提•說法者•無法可說•是名說
法•爾時慧命須菩提白佛言•世尊•頗有眾生•於未
來世•聞說是法•生信心不•佛言•須菩提•彼非眾
生•非不眾生•何以故•須菩提•眾生眾生者•如來
說非眾生•是名眾生• 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
25 
 
22. No Attainment Is Supreme Enlightenment 
Subhuti said to the Buddha: “World Honored One, when the 
Buddha attained unsurpassed co mplete enlightenment, was 
nothing actually attained?” The Buddha said, “So it is, Subhuti, 
so it is. As to unsurpassed complete enlightenment, I have not 
attained the slightest thing. This is why it is called unsurpassed 
complete enlightenment.” 
 
無 法 可 得 分 第 二 十 二 
須菩提白佛言•世尊•佛得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•為
無所得耶•佛言如是如是•須菩提•我於阿耨多羅三
藐三菩提•乃至無有少法可得•是名阿耨多羅三藐三
菩提• 
 
23. All Dharmas Are Equal 
“Furthermore, Subhuti, all dharmas are equal, none is superior 
or inferior. This  is called unsurpassed complete enlightenment. 
When one cultivates all good without the notions of a self, a 
person, a sentient being, or a lifespan, one attains unsurpassed 
complete enlightenment. Subhuti , the Tathagata teaches that 
good is not good, therefore it is good.” 
 
淨 心 行 善 分 第 二 十 三 
復次須菩提•是法平等•無有高下•是名阿耨多羅三
藐三菩提•以無我•無人•無眾生•無壽者•修一 切
善法•即得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•須菩提•所言善法
者•如來說即非善法•是名善法• 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
26 
 
24. The Merits of Transmitting the Sutra 
 “Subhuti, if a person accumulates the seven jewels into mounds 
equivalent to all Mt. Sumer us in the worlds of a  trichiliocosm 
and give s them away in charity, and another p erson recite s, 
remembers, followed, and t eaches this prajna paramita sutra or 
even a four-line verse of this sutra to others, the merit of the 
former would not be a  hundredth, or even a billionth , of that of 
the latter. In fact, the merit of the latter would be so great that no 
comparison, by calculation or by analogy, could possibly be 
made.”  
 
福智無比分第二十四 
須菩提•若三千大千世界中•所有諸須彌山王•如是
等七寶聚•有人持用布施•若人以此般若波羅蜜經•
乃至四句偈等•受持讀誦•為他人說•於前福德•百
分不及一•百千萬億分•乃至算數譬喻所不能及• 
 
25. There Are No Beings to Liberate 
 “Subhuti, what do you think? You should not claim  that the 
Tathagata has the thought,  ‘I will liberate sentient bein gs.’ 
Subhuti, do not have such a thought.  Why? There are in fact no 
sentient beings for the Tathagata  to liberate. If there were 
sentient beings liberated by the Tathagata, it would mean that 
the Tathagata holds the notion s of a self, a person, a sentient 
being, or a life span. Subhuti, when the Tathagata says ‘I’, there 
is actually no ‘I’. Yet ordinary beings think there is a real  ‘I’. 
Subhuti, the Tathagata says that ordinary beings are in fact not 
ordinary beings. Therefore they are called ordinary beings.”  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
27 
 
化 無 所 化 分 第 二 十 五 
須菩提•於意云何•汝等勿謂如來作是念•我當度眾
生•須菩提•莫作是念•何以故•實無有眾生如來度
者•若有眾生如來度者•如來即有我人眾生壽者•須
菩提•如來說有我者•即非有我•而凡夫之人以為有
我•須菩提•凡夫者•如來說即非凡夫•是名凡夫• 
 
26. Seek the Buddha Not in Form or Sound 
“Subhuti, what do you think? Can one discern the Tathagata by 
means of the thirty-two physical attributes?” Subhuti said, “Yes, 
yes. One can discern the Tathagata  by means of the thirty -two 
physical attributes.” The Buddha said, “Subhuti , if one discerns 
the Tathagata by means of the thirty -two physical attributes, 
then a wheel-turning sage king would be a tathagata.” Subhuti 
said to the Buddha, “World Honored One, as I understand the 
meaning of what you have said, one should not try to discern the 
Tathagata by means of the thirty -two physical attributes. ” Then 
the World Honored One spoke this verse:  
 
Those who see me in form,  
Or seek me through sound,  
Are on a mistaken path;  
They do not see the Tathagata. 
 
法 身 非 相 分 第 二 十 六 
須菩提•於意云何•可以三十二相觀如來不•須菩提
言•如是如是•以三十二相觀如來•佛言•須菩提•
若以三十二相觀如來者•轉輪聖王•即是如來•須菩
提白佛言•世尊• 如我解佛所說義•不應以三十二相
觀如來•爾時世尊而說偈言•若以色見我•以音聲求
我•是人行邪道•不能見如來• 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
28 
 
27. Avoid Annihilistic Views  
“Subhuti, if you think that the Tathagata attains unsurpassed 
complete enlightenment without the perfection of all attributes, 
then, Subhuti, you should not think this way , because the 
Tathagata does not attain u nsurpassed complete enlightenment 
without the perfection of all attributes. Subhuti, if you resolve to 
attain unsurpassed complete enlightenment  with such a thought, 
you would be asserting the extinction of dharmas. You sho uld 
not think this way. Why?  One who resolves to attain 
unsurpassed complete enlightenment does not assert the 
extinction of dharmas.” 
 
無 斷 無 滅 分 第 二 十 七 
須菩提•汝若作是念•如來不以具足相故•得阿耨多
羅三藐三菩提•須菩提•莫作是念•如來不以具足相
故•得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提•須菩提•汝若作是念•
發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心者•說諸法斷滅•莫作是
念•何以故•發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心者•於法不說
斷滅相• 
 
28. Bodhisattvas Do Not Accumulate Merits 
“Subhuti, if a bodhisattva give s away enough of the seven 
jewels to fill as many world systems as the grains of sand in the 
Ganges River, and another bodhisattva attains the forbearance of 
the selfless  nature of all phenomena, the virtue of  this 
bodhisattva would exceed that of the former. Why? Subhuti, this 
is because bodhisattvas do not  accumulate merits.” Subhuti said 
to the Buddha: “World Honored One, how is it that bodhisattvas 
do not accumulate merits?” “Subhuti, bodhisattvas do not cling 
to the merits they generate. Therefore I say that they do not  
accumulate merits.”  
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
29 
 
不 受 不 貪 分 第 二 十 八 
須菩提•若菩薩以滿恆河沙等世界七寶•持用布施•
若復有人•知一切法無我•得成於忍•此菩薩•勝前
菩薩•所得功德•何以故•須菩提•以諸菩薩•不受
福德故•須菩提白佛言•世尊•云何菩薩不受福德•
須菩提•菩薩所作福德•不應貪著•是故說不受福
德• 
 
29. The Thus-Come One Neither Comes Nor Goes 
“Subhuti, whoever says  that the Tathagata ( ‘Thus-come One ’) 
comes, goes, sits, or l ies down does not understand the meaning 
of my teaching. Why? The Thus -come One neither comes nor 
goes. Therefore he is called ‘Thus-come One’.”  
 
威 儀 寂 靜 分 第 二 十 九 
須菩提•若有人言•如來若來若去•若坐若臥•是人
不解我所說義•何以故•如來者•無所從來•亦無所
去•故名如來• 
 
30. The Nature of the World 
“Subhuti, what d o you think? If a good man or good woman 
takes all the worlds of a trichiliocosm and crushes them into tiny 
particles, would n’t these particles be numerous? ” “Extremely 
numerous, World Honored One. Why? If these tiny particles 
had real existence, the Buddh a would not call them tiny 
particles. What does this mean?  What the Buddha calls ‘tiny 
particles’ are not tiny particles. Therefore they are called tiny 
particles. World Honored One,  that which the Tathagata  calls 
‘all the worlds  of a tri chiliocosm’ are ac tually not worlds. 
Therefore they are called worlds. Why? To the extent that these  
 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
30 
 
worlds really exist, they do s o as a composite.  The Tathagata  
teaches that ‘composites’ are not composites. Therefore they are 
called composites.”  “Subhuti, a composite is actually ineffable, 
but ordinary beings form attachments to such phenomena.”  
 
一 合 理 相 分 第 三 十 
須菩提•若善男子善女人•以三千大千世界碎為微
塵•於意云何•是微塵眾•寧為多不•須菩提言•甚
多•世尊•何以故•若是微塵眾實有者•佛即不說是
微塵眾•所以者何•佛說微塵眾•即非微塵眾•是名
微塵眾•世尊•如來所說三千大千世界•即非世界•
是名世界•何以故•若世界實有者•即是一合相•如
來說一合相•即非一合相•是名一合相•須菩提•一
合相者•即是不可說•但凡夫之人•貪著其事• 
 
31. Extinction of the Four Views 
“Subhuti, if someone claims tha t I teach view s of a self, a 
person, a sentient being, or a life span, what would you say? 
Has this person understood the meaning of my teaching? ” 
“World Honored One, this person has not understood the 
meaning of the Tathagata’s teaching. Why? The World Honored 
One explains that views of a self, a person, a sentient being, or a 
life span are actually not views of a self, a person, a sentient 
being, or a life span. Therefore they are called views of a self, a 
person, a sentient being, or a life span.”  “Subhuti, one who  
resolves to attain unsurpassed complete enlightenment should 
know, perceive, believe, and understand all dharmas like this, 
just as they are, without attachment to the attributes of any 
dharma. Subhuti, the Tathagata has explained that dharma  
attributes are not dharma attributes, t herefore they are called 
dharma attributes.” 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
31 
 
知見不生分第三十一  
須菩提•若人言•佛說我見•人見•眾生見•壽者
見•須菩提•於意云何•是人解我所說義不•不也•
世尊•是人不解如來所說義•何以故•世尊說我見•
人見•眾生見•壽者見•即非我見•人見•眾生見•
壽者見•是名我見•人見•眾生見•壽者見•須菩
提•發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心者•於一切法•應如是
知•如是見•如是信解•不生法相•須菩提•所言法
相者•如來說即非法相•是名法相• 
 
32. All Phenomena Are Illusions 
“Subhuti, if a person amasses enough of the seven jewels to  fill 
countless worlds and give s them away in charity, and if a good 
man or good woman with the bodhisattva resolve takes as few 
as a four -line verse of this s utra,  recites, remembers, follows, 
and expounds it to others, the latter’s  merit would far exceed 
that of the former.  How should one teach it to others? Without 
attachment, abiding in stillness and suchness. Why?  
 
All conditioned phenomena 
Are like a dream, an illusion, a bubble, a shadow, 
Like dew or a flash of lightning; 
Thus we shall perceive them.” 
 
With this the Buddha concluded the sutra. The elder Subhuti, other 
bhiksus, bhiksunis, upasakas, upasikas, heavenly and human 
beings, asuras, and other beings of the world, having heard the 
Buddha, were all filled with immense jo y; they accepted and 
followed the teaching faithfully. 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
 
The Diamond of Perfect Wisdom Sutra 
32 
 
應 化 非 真 分 第 三 十 二 
須菩提•若有人以滿無量阿僧祇世界七寶•持用布
施•若有善男子善女人•發菩提心者•持於此經•乃
至四句偈等•受持讀誦•為人演說•其福勝彼•云何
為人演說•不取於相•如如不動•何以故•一切有為
法•如夢幻泡影•如露亦如電•應作如是觀• 
 
佛說是經已•長老須菩提及諸比丘•比丘尼•優婆
塞•優婆夷•一切世間天人阿修羅•聞佛所說•皆大
歡喜•信受奉行• 
 
金剛般若波羅蜜經 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS  
1. Suffering exists in everyone’s life.  
2. The causes of suffering are greed, anger, and  
 ignorance.  
3.  Nirvana, the extinction of suffering, is possible for 
 everyone.  
4. Nirvana is achieved by following the Noble  
 Eightfold Path. 
 
四聖諦 
苦﹐集﹐滅﹐道。 
 
 
 
 
THE NOBLE EIGHTFOLD PATH  
Right Understanding, Right Thought,  
Right Speech, Right Action,  
Right Livelihood, Right Effort, 
Right Mindfulness, and Right Samadhi. 
 
八正道 
正見﹐正思惟﹐正語﹐正業﹐ 
正命﹐正精進﹐正念﹐正定。 
 
34 
 
THREE REFUGES  
 
三 皈 依 
 
I take refuge in the Buddha, may all sentient beings 
Understand the Great Way profoundly, and  
Bring forth the bodhi mind. 
 
I take refuge in the Dharma, may all sentient beings 
Deeply enter the sutra treasury, and  
Have wisdom vast as the sea. 
 
I take refuge in the Sangha, may all sentient beings 
Form together a great assembly, one and all in harmony. 
 
自皈依佛  當願眾生  體解大道  發無上心 
自皈依法  當願眾生  深入經藏  智慧如海 
自皈依僧  當願眾生  統理大眾  一切無礙 
和南聖眾 
 
FOUR GREAT VOWS 
 
四 弘 誓 願 
 
Countless are sentient beings, I vow to liberate; 
Endless are afflictions, I vow to eradicate; 
Measureless are the Dharmas, I vow to master; 
Supreme is the Buddha Way, I vow to attain. 
 
眾 生 無 邊 誓 願 度   煩 惱 無 盡 誓 願 斷 
法 門 無 量 誓 願 學   佛 道 無 上 誓 願 成 
 
35 
 
 
REPENTA NCE 
 
懺 悔 偈 
 
All the harm I have ever done, since time immemorial, 
Are caused by greed, anger, and ignorance, 
And produced through my body, speech, and will, 
Now I confess and amend all. 
 
 
往 昔 所 造 諸 惡 業   皆 由 無 始 貪 瞋 痴  
從 身 語 意 之 所 生   一 切 罪 障 皆 懺 悔 
 
 
 
DEDICATION  OF MERITS  
 
回 向 偈 
 
May the merits of our deeds  
Reach every part of the world;  
Sentient beings large and small  
All attain enlightenment.  
Maha-Prajna-Paramita  
 
願以此功德   普及於一切   
我等與眾生   皆共成佛道   
摩訶般若 波羅蜜 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
中台禪寺  
Chung Tai Chan Monastery 
2 Chung Tai Road, Puli, Nantou 54544, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
Tel: (886-49) 2930-215   http://www.ctworld.org   ctworld@mail.ctcm.org.tw 
美國 太 谷 精 舍 
Chung Tai Zen Center  
of Sunnyvale 
750 East Arques Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA 
Tel. (1) 408-733-0750   
http://sunnyvale.ctzen.org    sunnyvale@ctzen.org   
美 國 佛 門 寺  
Buddha Gate Monastery 
3254 Gloria Terrace, Lafayette, CA 94549, USA 
Tel. (1) 925-934-2411 
www.buddhagate.org    mail@buddhagate.org 
美國 中 洲 禪 寺  
Middle Land Chan Monastery 
1173 San Bernardino Avenue, Pomona, CA 91767, USA 
Tel. (1) 909-625-0187 
www.middleland.org    middleland@ctzen.org 
美國 佛 心 寺  
Buddha Mind Monastery 
5800 South Anderson Road, Oklahoma City, OK 73150, USA 
Tel. (1) 405-869-0501 
www.ctbuddhamind.org    buddhamindokc@gmail.com 
美國 普 德 精 舍  
Chung Tai Zen Center  
of Houston 
12129 Bellaire Boulevard, Houston, TX 77072, USA 
Tel. (1) 281-568-1568   
www.cthouston.org    zen@cthouston.org 
德 州 寶 塔 禪 寺 
Texas Pagoda Chan Monastery  
100 Chung Tai Road (P.O. Box 1247), Shepherd,  
TX 77371, USA 
Tel. (1) 936-365-2451 or (1)713-560-2889 
www.ctcmusa.org    zen@ctcmusa.org 
美國 佛 寶 寺  
Buddha Jewel Monastery 
7930 Rainier Avenue South, Seattle, WA 98118, USA 
Tel. (1) 206-721-9921 
www.buddhajewel.org    buddhajewel@ctzen.org 
美國 法 寶 寺  
Dharma Jewel Monastery 
2550 Henderson Mill Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30345, USA 
Phone: 770-939-5008 
http://dharmajewel.us    dharmajewel@ctzen.org 
澳 洲 寶 林 禪 寺 
Bao Lin Chan Monastery  
94A High Street, Glen Iris, VIC. 3146, Australia 
Telephone: 03-9813-8922 
www.chungtai.org.au     baolin@mail.ctcm.org.tw 
日本 普東 禪 寺 
Pudong Chan Monastery 
22-2 Shinbashi-cho, Kadoma City, Osaka 571-0048, Japan 
Tel. 06-6902-2400 
http://jpzen.org/pdeng    zen@jpzen.org   
菲 律 賓 海 天 禪 寺 
Ocean Sky Monastery 
716 Jose Abad Santos St, Little Baguio, San Juan,  
Metro Manila, Philippines 
Tel. (632) 723-6132 
http://ctworld.org/108/oceansky  oceansky@mail.ctcm.org.tw  
香 港 普 廣 精 舍 
Puguang Meditation Center 
G/F, Kingstown Mansion, 319-323 Jaffe Road, Wan Chai,  
Hong Kong 
Tel. (852) 2915-6011 
http://ctworld.org/108/puguang3  puguang@mail.ctcm.org.tw 
泰 國 泰 佛 寺  
Great Buddha Monastery 
61/84-86 Mooban Thaveemit, Rama 9 Rd, Bangkok 10320, 
Thailand 
Tel. (66) 2643-2386 
http://ctworld.org/108/GreatBuddha  thaifo@mail.ctcm.org.tw 
奧 地 利 普 法 精 舍 
Chung Tai Zen Center of Linz 
Hoerzingerstr. 62 ab, 4020 Linz, Austria 
Tel. (43) 732-944704 
http://www.ctworld.org/108/pufa    pufa@mail.ctcm.org.tw 
義 大 利 華 義 寺 
Hua Yi Si  
Tempio Cinese-Italiano 
Via Dell' omo N.142 00155 Roma Italia 
Tel. (39) 06-22428876 
huayi@mail.ctcm.org.tw      
For a listing of Chung Tai meditation centers and monasteries in Taiwan, visit http://www.ctworld.org  
v1.9.17  12-2013 
