© HHP November 1997 GGGG
An annotated edition
Hermann Hesse
SIDDHARTHA
In the English translation by Hilda Rosner
© New York: New Directions Publishing Corporation, 1951
PART I
The Brahmin's.Son
In the shade of the house, in the sunshine on the river bank by the boats, in the shade of the sallow wood1
and the fig tree,2 Siddhartha,3 the handsome Brahmin's4. son, grew up with his friend Govinda.5  The sun
browned his slender shoulders on the river bank, while bathing at the holy ablutions,6 at the holy sacrifices.7
Shadows passed across his eyes in the mango grove8 during play, while his mother sang, during his father's
teachings, when with the learned men.  Siddhartha had already long taken part in the learned men's
conversations, had engaged in debate with Govinda and had practiced the art of contemplation9 and
meditation10 with him. Already he knew how to pronounce Om11 silently - this word of words, to say it
inwardly with the intake of breath, when breathing out with all his soul, his brow radiating the glow of pure
spirit.  Already he knew how to recognize Atman12 within the depth of his being, indestructible, at one with
the universe.13
There was happiness in his father's heart because of his son who was intelligent and thirsty for knowledge;
he saw him growing up to be a great learned man, a priest, a prince among Brahmins.
There was pride in his mother's breast when she saw him walking, sitting down and rising:  Siddhartha -
strong, handsome, supple-limbed, greeting her with complete grace.
Love stirred in the hearts of the young Brahmins' daughters when Siddhartha walked through the streets of
the town, with his lofty brow, his king-like eyes and his slim figure.
Govinda, his friend, the Brahmin's son, loved him more than anybody else. He loved Siddhartha's eyes and
clear voice. He loved the way he walked, his complete grace of movement; he loved everything that
Siddhartha did and said, and above all he loved his intellect, his fine ardent14 thoughts, his strong will, his
high vocation.15  Govinda knew that he would not become an ordinary Brahmin, a lazy sacrificial official, an
avaricious dealer in magic sayings, a conceited worthless orator, a wicked sly priest, or just a good stupid
sheep amongst a large herd.  No, and he, Govinda, did not want to become any of these, not a Brahmin like
ten thousand others of their kind. He wanted to follow Siddhartha, the beloved, the magnificent. And if he
ever became a god, if he ever entered the All-Radiant, then Govinda wanted to follow him as his friend, his
companion, his servant, his lance bearer, his shadow.
That was how everybody loved Siddhartha.  He delighted and made everybody happy.
But Siddhartha himself was not happy.  Wandering along the rosy paths of the fig garden, sitting in
contemplation in the bluish shade of the grove, washing his limbs in the daily bath of atonement,16 offering
sacrifices in the depths of the shady mango wood with complete grace of manner, beloved by all, a joy to all,
there was yet no joy in his own heart.  Dreams and restless thoughts came flowing to him from the river,17
from the twinkling stars at night, from the sun's melting rays.  Dreams and a restlessness of the soul came to
him, arising from the smoke of the sacrifices, emanating from the verses of the Rig-Veda,18 trickling through
from the teachings of the old Brahmins.
Siddhartha had begun to feel the seeds of discontent within him.  He had begun to feel that the love of his
father and mother, and also the love of his friend Govinda, would not always make him happy give him
peace, satisfy and suffice him.  He had begun to suspect that his worthy father and his other teachers, the
wise Brahmins, had already passed on to him the bulk and best of their wisdom, that they had already poured
the sum total of their knowledge into his waiting vessel; and the vessel was not full, his intellect was not
satisfied, his soul was not at peace, his heart was not still.  The ablutions were good, but they were water;
they did not wash sins away, they did not relieve the distressed heart.  The sacrifices and the supplication of
the gods were excellent - but were they everything?  Did the sacrifices give happiness? And what about the
gods?  Was it really Prajapati19 who had created the world?  Was it not Atman, He alone, who had created
it?  Were not the gods forms created like me and you, mortal, transient?  Was it therefore good and right,
was it a sensible and worthy act to offer sacrifices to the gods?  To whom else should one offer sacrifices, to
whom else should one pay honor, but to Him, Atman, the Only One?  And where was Atman to be found,
where did He dwell, where did His eternal heart beat, if not within the Self,20 in the innermost, in the eternal
which each person carried within him?  But where was this Self, this innermost?  It was not flesh and bone,
it was not thought or consciousness.  That was what the wise men taught.  Where, then, was it?  To press
towards the Self, towards Atman - was there another way that was worth seeking?  Nobody showed the way,
nobody knew it - neither his father, nor the teachers and wise men, nor the holy songs.  The Brahmins and
their holy books knew everything, everything; they had gone into everything - the creation of the world, the
origin of speech, food, inhalation, exhalation, the arrangement of the senses, the acts of the gods.  They
knew a tremendous number of things - but was it worth while knowing all these things if they did not know
the one important thing, the only important thing?
Many verses of the holy books, above all the Upanishads21 of Sama-Veda22 spoke of this innermost thing.  It
is written: "Your soul is the whole world."  It says that when a man is asleep, he penetrates his innermost
and dwells in Atman.  There was wonderful wisdom in these verses; all the knowledge of the sages was told
here in enchanting language, pure as honey collected by the bees.  No, this tremendous amount of
knowledge, collected and preserved by successive generations of wise Brahmins could not be easily
overlooked.  But where were the Brahmins, the priests, the wise men, who were successful not only in
having this most profound knowledge, but in experiencing it?  Where were the initiated who, attaining
Atman in sleep, could retain it in consciousness, in life, everywhere, in speech and in action?  Siddhartha
knew many worthy Brahmins, above all his father - holy, learned, of highest esteem.  His father was worthy
of admiration; his manner was quiet and noble.  He lived a good life, his words were wise; fine and noble
thoughts dwelt in his head - but even he who knew so much, did he live in bliss, was he at peace?  Was he
not also a seeker, insatiable?  Did he not go continually to the holy springs with an insatiable thirst, to the
sacrifices, to books, to the Brahmins' discourses?  Why must he, blameless one, wash away his sins and
endeavor to cleanse himself anew each day?  Was Atman then not within him?  Was not then the source
within his own heart?  One must find the source within one's own Self, one must possess it.  Everything else
was seeking, a detour, error.
These were Siddhartha's thoughts; this was his thirst, his sorrow.
He often repeated to himself the words from one of the Chandogya-Upanishads.23  "In truth, the name of
Brahman24 is Satya.25  Indeed, he who knows it enters the heavenly world each day."  It often seemed near -
the heavenly world - but never had he quite reached it, never had he quenched the final thirst.  And among
the wise men that he knew and whose teachings he enjoyed, there was not one who had completely
quenched the eternal thirst.
"Govinda," said Siddhartha to his friend, "Govinda, come with me to the banyan tree.26  We will practice
meditation."
They went to the banyan tree and sat down, twenty paces apart.  As he sat down ready to pronounce the Om,
Siddhartha softly recited the verse:
"Om is the bow, the arrow is the soul,
Brahman is the arrow's goal
At which one aims unflinchingly."
When the customary time for the practice of meditation had passed, Govinda rose.  It was now evening.  It
was time to perform the evening ablutions.  He called Siddhartha by his name; he did not reply.  Siddhartha
sat absorbed, his eyes staring as if directed at a distant goal, the tip of his tongue showing a little between his
teeth.  He did not seem to be breathing.  He sat thus, lost in meditation, thinking Om, his soul as the arrow
directed at Brahman.
Some Samanas27 once passed through Siddhartha's town.  Wandering ascetics,28 they were three thin worn-
out men, neither old nor young, with dusty and bleeding shoulders, practically naked, scorched by the sun,
solitary, strange and hostile - lean jackals29 in the world of men.  Around them hovered an atmosphere of
still passion, of devastating service, of unpitying self-denial.
In the evening, after the hour of contemplation, Siddhartha said to Govinda: "Tomorrow morning, my friend,
Siddhartha is going to join the Samanas.  He is going to become a Samana."
Govinda blanched30 as he heard these words and read the decision in his friend's determined face,
undeviating as the released arrow from the bow.  Govinda realized from the first glance at his friend's face
that now it was beginning.  Siddhartha was going his own way; his destiny was beginning to unfold itself,
and with his destiny, his own.  And he became as pale as a dried banana skin.
"Oh, Siddhartha," he cried, "will your father permit it?"
Siddhartha looked at him like one who had just awakened.  As quick as lightning he read Govinda's soul,
read the anxiety, the resignation.
"We will not waste words, Govinda," he said softly.  "Tomorrow at daybreak I will begin the life of the
Samanas.  Let us not discuss it again."
Siddhartha went into the room where his father was sitting on a mat made of bast.  He went up behind his
father and remained standing there until his father felt his presence.  "Is it you, Siddhartha?" the Brahmin
asked.  "Then speak what is in your mind."
Siddhartha said: "With your permission, Father, I have come to tell you that I wish to leave your house
tomorrow and join the ascetics.  I wish to become a Samana.  I trust my father will not object."
The Brahmin was silent so long that the stars passed across the small window and changed their design
before the silence in the room was finally broken.  His son stood silent and motionless with his arms folded.
The father, silent and motionless, sat on the mat, and the stars passed across the sky.  Then his father said:
"It is not seemly for Brahmins to utter forceful and angry words, but there is displeasure in my heart.  I
should not like to hear you make this request a second time."
The Brahmin rose slowly.  Siddhartha remained silent with folded arms.
"Why are you waiting?" asked his father.
"You know why," answered Siddhartha.
His father left the room displeased and lay down on his bed.
As an hour passed by and he could not sleep, the Brahmin rose, wandered up and down and then left the
house.  He looked through the small window of the room and saw Siddhartha standing there with his arms
folded, unmoving.  He could see his pale robe shimmering.  His heart troubled, the father returned to his
bed.
As another hour passed and the Brahmin could not sleep, he rose again, walked up and down, left the house
and saw the moon had risen.  He looked through the window.  Siddhartha stood there unmoving, his arms
folded; the moon shone on his bare shinbones. His heart troubled, the father went to bed.
He returned again after an hour and again after two hours, looked through the window and saw Siddhartha
standing there in the moonlight, in the starlight, in the dark.  And he came silently again, hour after hour,
looked into the room, and saw him standing unmoving.  His heart filled with anger, with anxiety, with fear,
with sorrow.
And in the last hour of the night, before daybreak, he returned again, entered the room and saw the youth
standing there. He seemed tall and a stranger to him.
"Siddhartha," he said, "why are you waiting?"
"You know why."
"Will you go on standing and waiting until it is day, noon, evening?"
"I will stand and wait."
"You will grow tired, Siddhartha."
"I will grow tired."
"You will fall asleep, Siddhartha."
"I will not fall asleep."
"You will die, Siddhartha."
"I will die."
"And would you rather die than obey your father?"
"Siddhartha has always obeyed his father."
"So you will give up your project?"
"Siddhartha will do what his father tells him."
The first light of day entered the room.  The Brahmin saw that Siddhartha's knees trembled slightly, but
there was no trembling in Siddhartha's face; his eyes looked far away.  Then the father realized that
Siddhartha could no longer remain with him at home - that he had already left him.
The father touched Siddhartha's shoulder.
"You will go into the forest," he said, "and become a Samana. If you find bliss in the forest, come back and
teach it to me.  If you find disillusionment, come back, and we shall again offer sacrifices to the gods
together.  Now go, kiss your mother and tell her where you are going.  For me, however, it is time to go to
the river and perform the first ablution."
He dropped his hand from his son's shoulder and went out.  Siddhartha swayed as he tried to walk.  He
controlled himself, bowed to his father and went to his mother to do what had been told to him.
As, with benumbed legs, he slowly left the still sleeping town at daybreak, a crouching shadow emerged
from the last hut and joined the pilgrim. It was Govinda.
"You have come," said Siddhartha and smiled.
"I have come," said Govinda.
With the Samanas
On the evening of that day they overtook the Samanas and requested their company and allegiance.31  They
were accepted.
Siddhartha gave his clothes to a poor Brahmin on the road and only retained his loincloth and earth-colored
unstitched cloak.  He only ate once a day and never cooked food.  He fasted32 fourteen days.  He fasted
twenty-eight days.  The flesh disappeared from his legs and cheeks.  Strange dreams were reflected in his
enlarged eyes.  The nails grew long on his thin fingers and a dry, bristly beard appeared on his chin.  His
glance became icy when he encountered women; his lips curled with contempt when he passed through a
town of well-dressed people.  He saw businessmen trading, princes going to the hunt, mourners weeping
over their dead, prostitutes offering themselves, doctors attending the sick, priests deciding the day for
sowing, lovers making love, mothers soothing their children - and all were not worth a passing glance,
everything lied, stank of lies; they were all illusions of sense, happiness and beauty.  All were doomed to
decay.  The world tasted bitter.  Life was pain.
Siddhartha had one single goal - to become empty, to become empty of thirst, desire, dreams, pleasure and
sorrow - to let the Self die.  No longer to be Self, to experience the peace of an emptied heart, to experience
pure thought - that was his goal.  When all the Self was conquered and dead, when all passions and desires
were silent, then the last must awaken, the innermost of Being that is no longer Self-the great secret!
Silently Siddhartha stood in the fierce sun's rays, filled with pain and thirst, and stood until he no longer felt
pain and thirst.  Silently he stood in the rain, water dripping from his hair on to his freezing shoulders, on to
his freezing hips and legs.  And the ascetic stood until his shoulders and legs no longer froze, till they were
silent, till they were still.  Silently he crouched among the thorns.  Blood dripped from his smarting33 skin,
ulcers formed, and Siddhartha remained stiff, motionless, till no more blood flowed, till there was no more
pricking, no more smarting.
Siddhartha sat upright and learned to save his breath, to manage with little breathing, to hold his breath.  He
learned, while breathing in, to quiet his heartbeat, learned to lessen his heartbeats, until there were few and
hardly anymore.
Instructed by the eldest of the Samanas, Siddhartha practiced self-denial and meditation according to the
Samana rules.  A heron34 flew over the bamboo35 wood and Siddhartha took the heron into his soul, flew
over forest and mountains, became a heron, ate fishes, suffered heron hunger, used heron language, died a
heron's death.  A dead jackal lay on the sandy shore and Siddhartha's soul slipped into its corpse; he became
a dead jackal, lay on the shore, swelled, stank, decayed, was dismembered by hyenas, was picked at by
vultures, became a skeleton, became dust, mingled with the atmosphere.  And Siddhartha's soul returned,
died, decayed, turned into dust, experienced the troubled course of the life cycle.36  He waited with new
thirst like a hunter at a chasm where the life cycle ends, where there is an end to causes, where painless
eternity begins.  He killed his senses, he killed his memory, he slipped out of his Self in a thousand different
forms.  He was animal, carcass, stone, wood, water, and each time he reawakened.  The sun or moon shone,
he was again Self, swung into the life cycle, felt thirst, conquered thirst, felt new thirst.
Siddhartha learned a great deal from the Samanas; he learned many ways of losing the Self.  He travelled
along the path of self - denial through pain, through voluntary suffering and conquering of pain, through
hunger, thirst and fatigue.  He travelled the way of self-denial through meditation, through the emptying of
the mind of all images.  Along these and other paths did he learn to travel.  He lost his Self a thousand times
and for days on end he dwelt in nonbeing.  But although the paths took him away from Self, in the end they
always led back to it.  Although Siddhartha fled from the Self a thousand times, dwelt in nothing, dwelt in
animal and stone, the return was inevitable; the hour was inevitable when he would again find himself, in
sunshine or in moonlight, in shadow or in rain, and was again Self and Siddhartha, again felt the torment of
the onerous life cycle.
At his side lived Govinda, his shadow; he travelled along the same path, made the same endeavors. They
rarely conversed with each other apart from the necessities of their service and practices.  Sometimes they
went together through the villages in order to beg food for themselves and their teachers.
"What do you think, Govinda?  Siddhartha asked at the beginning of one of these expeditions.  "Do you
think we are any further? Have we reached our goal?"
Govinda replied: "We have learned and we are still learning.  You will become a great Samana, Siddhartha.
You have learned each exercise quickly.  The old Samanas have often appraised you.  Some day you will be
a holy man, Siddhartha."
Siddhartha said: "It does not appear so to me, my friend.  What I have so far learned from the Samanas, I
could have learned more quickly and easily in every inn in a prostitute's quarter, amongst the carriers and
dice players."
Govinda said: “How could you have learned meditation, holding of the breath and insensibility towards
hunger and pain, with those wretches?"
And Siddhartha said softly, as if speaking to himself: "What is meditation?  What is abandonment of the
body?  What is fasting?  What is the holding of breath?  It is a flight from the Self, it is a temporary escape
from the torment of Self.  It is a temporary palliative37 against the pain and folly of life.  The driver of oxen
makes this same flight, takes this temporary drug when he drinks a few bowls of rice wine or cocoanut milk
in the inn.  He then no longer feels his Self, no longer feels the pain of life; he then experiences temporary
escape.  Falling asleep over his bowl of rice wine, he finds what Siddhartha and Govinda find when they
escape from their bodies by long exercises and dwell in the non-Self."
Govinda said: "You speak thus, my friend, and yet you know that Siddhartha is no driver of oxen and a
Samana is no drunkard.  The drinker does indeed find escape, he does indeed find a short respite and rest,
but he returns from the illusion and finds everything as it was before.  He has not grown wiser, he has not
gained knowledge, he has not climbed any higher."
Siddhartha answered with a smile on his face: "I do not know.  I have never been a drunkard.  But that I,
Siddhartha, only find a short respite in my exercises and meditation, and am as remote from wisdom, from
salvation,38 as a child in the womb, that, Govinda, I do know."
On another occasion when Siddhartha left the wood with Govinda in order to beg for food for their brothers
and teachers, Siddhartha began to speak and said: "Well, Govinda, are we on the right road?  Are we gaining
knowledge?  Are we approaching salvation?  Or are we perhaps going in circles - we who thought to escape
from the cycle?"
Govinda said: "We have learned much, Siddhartha.  There still remains much to learn.  We are not going in
circles, we are going upwards.  The path is a spiral; we have already climbed many steps."
Siddhartha replied: "How old, do you think, is our oldest Samana, our worthy teacher?"
Govinda said: "I think the eldest would be about sixty years old."
And Siddhartha said: "He is sixty years old and has not attained Nirvana.39  He will be seventy and eighty
years old, and you and I, we shall grow as old as he, and do exercises and fast and meditate, but we will not
attain Nirvana, neither he nor we.  Govinda, I believe that amongst all the Samanas, probably not even one
will attain Nirvana. We find consolations, we learn tricks with which we deceive ourselves, but the essential
thing - the way - we do not find."
"Do not utter such dreadful words, Siddhartha," said Govinda.  "How could it be that amongst so many
learned men, amongst so many Brahmins, amongst so many austere40 and worthy Samanas, amongst so
many seekers, so many devoted to the inner life, so many holy men, none will find the right way?"
Siddhartha, however, said in a voice which contained as much grief as mockery,41 in a soft, somewhat sad,
somewhat jesting voice: "Soon, Govinda, your friend will leave the path of the Samanas along which he has
travelled with you so long.  I suffer thirst, Govinda, and on this long Samana path my thirst has not grown
less.  I have always thirsted for knowledge, I have always been full of questions.  Year after year I have
questioned the Brahmins, year after year I have questioned the holy Vedas.42  Perhaps, Govinda, it would
have been equally good, equally clever and holy if I had questioned the rhinoceros or the chimpanzee.  I
have spent a long time and have not yet finished, in order to learn this, Govinda: that one can learn nothing.
There is, so I believe, in the essence of everything, something that we cannot call learning.  There is, my
friend, only a knowledge  -that is everywhere, that is Atman, that is in me and you and in every creature, and
I am beginning to believe that this knowledge has no worse enemy than the man of knowledge, than
learning."
Thereupon Govinda stood still on the path, raised his hands and said: "Siddhartha, do not distress your friend
with such talk.  Truly, your words trouble me.  Think, what meaning would our holy prayers have, the
venerableness43 of the Brahmins, the holiness of the Samanas, if, as you say, there is no learning?
Siddhartha, what would become of everything, what would be holy on earth, what would be precious and
sacred?"
Govinda murmured a verse to himself, a verse from one of the Upanishads:
"He whose reflective pure spirit sinks into Atman
Knows bliss inexpressible through words."
Siddhartha was silent.  He dwelt long on the words which Govinda had uttered.
Yes, he thought, standing with bowed head, what remains from all that seems holy to us?  What remains?
What is preserved?  And he shook his head.
Once, when both youths had lived with the Samanas about three years and shared their practices, they heard
from many sources a rumor, a report.  Someone had appeared, called Gotama,44 the Illustrious, the Buddha.45
He had conquered in himself the sorrows of the world and had brought to a standstill the cycle of rebirth.
He wandered through the country preaching, surrounded by disciples, having no possessions, homeless,
without a wife, wearing the yellow cloak46 of an ascetic, but with lofty brow, a holy man, and Brahmins and
princes bowed before him and became his pupils.
This report, this rumor, this tale was heard and spread here and there.  The Brahmins talked about it in the
town, the Samanas in the forest.  The name of Gotama, the Buddha, continually reached the ears of the
young men, spoken of well and ill, in praise and in scorn.
Just as when a country is ravaged with the plague and a rumor arises that there is a man, a wise man, a
learned man, whose words and breath are sufficient to heal the afflicted, and as the report travels across the
country and everyone speaks about it, many believe and many doubt it.  Many, however, immediately go on
their way to seek the wise man, the benefactor.  In such a manner did that rumor, that happy report of
Gotama the Buddha, the wise man from the race of Sakya,47 travel through the country.  He possessed great
knowledge, said the believers; he remembered his former lives, he had attained Nirvana and never returned
on the cycle, he plunged no more into the troubled stream of forms.  Many wonderful and incredible things
were reported about him; he had performed wonders, had conquered the devil, had spoken with the gods.
His enemies and doubters, however, said that this Gotama was an idle fraud; he passed his days in high
living, scorned the sacrifices, was unlearned and knew neither practices nor mortification48 of the flesh.
The rumors of the Buddha sounded attractive; there was magic in these reports.  The world was sick, life
was difficult and here there seemed new hope, here there seemed to be a message, comforting, mild, full of
fine promises.  Everywhere there were rumors about the Buddha.  Young men all over India listened, felt a
longing and a hope.  And among the Brahmins' sons in the towns and villages, every pilgrim and stranger
was welcome if he brought news of him, the Illustrious, the Sakyamuni.49
The rumors reached the Samanas in the forest and Siddhartha and Govinda, a little at a time, every little item
heavy with hope, heavy with doubt.  They spoke little about it, as the eldest Samana was no friend of this
rumor.  He had heard that this alleged Buddha had formerly been an ascetic and had lived in the woods, had
then turned to high living and the pleasures of the world, and he held no brief for this Gotama.
"Siddhartha," Govinda once said to his friend, "today I was in the village and a Brahmin invited me to enter
his house and in the house was a Brahmin's son from Magadha;50 he had seen the Buddha with his own eyes
and had heard him preach.  Truly I was filled with longing and I thought: I wish that both Siddhartha and I
may live to see the day when we can hear the teachings from the lips of the Perfect One.  My friend, shall we
not also go hither and hear the teachings from the lips of the Buddha?"
Siddhartha said: "I always thought that Govinda would remain with the Samanas.  I always believed it was
his goal to be sixty and seventy years old and still practice the arts and exercises which the Samanas teach.
But how little did I know Govinda!  How little did I know what was in his heart!  Now, my dear friend, you
wish to strike a new path and go and hear the Buddha's teachings."
Govinda said: "It gives you pleasure to mock me.  No matter if you do, Siddhartha.  Do you not also feel a
longing, a desire to hear this teaching?  And did you not once say to me - I will not travel the path of the
Samanas much longer?"
Then Siddhartha laughed in such a way that his voice expressed a shade of sorrow and a shade of mockery
and he said: "You have spoken well, Govinda, you have remembered well, but you must also remember
what else I told you - that I have become distrustful of teachings and learning and that I have little faith in
words that come to us from teachers.  But, very well, my friend, I am ready to hear that new teaching,
although I believe in my heart that we have already tasted the best fruit of it."
Govinda replied: "I am delighted that you are agreed.  But tell me, how can the teachings of Gotama disclose
to us its most precious fruit before we have even heard him?"
Siddhartha said: "Let us enjoy this fruit and await further ones, Govinda.  This fruit, for which we are
already indebted to Gotama, consists in the fact that he has enticed us away from the Samanas.  Whether
there are still other and better fruits, let us patiently wait and see."
On the same day, Siddhartha informed the eldest Samana of his decision to leave him.  He told the old man
with the politeness and modesty fitting to young men and students.  But the old man was angry that both
young men wished to leave him and he raised his voice and scolded them strongly.
Govinda was taken aback, but Siddhartha put his lips to Govinda's ear and whispered: "Now I will show the
old man that I have learned something from him."
He stood near the Samana, his mind intent; he looked into the old man's eyes and held him with his look,
hypnotized him,51 made him mute, conquered his will, commanded him silently to do as he wished.  The old
man became silent, his eyes glazed, his will crippled; his arms hung down, he was powerless under
Siddhartha's spell.  Siddhartha's thoughts conquered those of the Samana; he had to perform what they
commanded.  And so the old man bowed several times, gave his blessings and stammered his wishes for a
good journey.  The young men thanked him for his good wishes, returned his bow, and departed.
On the way, Govinda said: "Siddhartha, you have learned more from the Samanas than I was aware.  It is
difficult, very difficult to hypnotize an old Samana.  In truth, if you had stayed there, you would have soon
learned how to walk on water."
"I have no desire to walk on water," said Siddhartha.  "Let the old Samanas satisfy themselves with such
arts."
Gotama
In the town of Savathi52 every child knew the name of the illustrious Buddha and every house was ready to
fill the alms bowls53 of Gotama's silently begging disciples.  Near the town was Gotama's favorite abode, the
Jetavana grove,54 which the rich merchant Anathapindika,55 a great devotee of the Illustrious One, had
presented to him and his followers.
The two young ascetics, in their search for Gotama's abode, had been referred to this district by tales and
answers to their questions, and on their arrival in Savathi, food was offered to them immediately at the first
house in front of whose door they stood silently begging.  They partook of food and Siddhartha asked the
lady who handed him the food:
"Good lady, we should like very much like to know where the Buddha, the Illustrious One, dwells, for we
are two Samanas from the forest and have come to see the Perfect One and hear his teachings from his own
lips."
The woman said: "You have come to the right place, O Samanas from the forest.  The Illustrious One
sojourns56 in Jetavana, in the garden of Anathapindika.  You may spend the night there, pilgrims, for there is
enough room for the numerous people who flock here to hear the teachings from his lips."
Then Govinda rejoiced and happily said: "Ah, then we have reached our goal and our journey is at an end.
But tell us, mother of pilgrims, do you know the Buddha?  Have you seen him with your own eyes?"
The woman said: "I have seen the Illustrious One many times.  On many a day I have seen him walk through
the streets, silently, in a yellow cloak, and silently hold out his alms bowl at the house doors and return with
his filled bowl."
Govinda listened enchanted and wanted to ask many more questions and hear much more, but Siddhartha
reminded him that it was time to go.  They expressed their thanks and departed.  It was hardly necessary to
enquire the way, for quite a number of pilgrims and monks57 from Gotama's followers were on the way to
Jetavana.  When they arrived there at night, there were continual new arrivals.  There was a stir of voices
from them, requesting and obtaining shelter.  The two Samanas, who were used to life in the forest, quickly
and quietly found shelter and stayed there till morning.
At sunrise they were astounded to see the large number of believers and curious people who had spent the
night there.  Monks in yellow robes wandered along all the paths of the magnificent grove.  Here and there
they sat under the trees, lost in meditation or engaged in spirited talk.  The shady gardens were like a town,
swarming with bees.  Most of the monks departed with 'their alms bowls, in order to obtain food for their
midday meal, the only one of the day.  Even the Buddha himself went begging in the morning.
Siddhartha saw him and recognized him immediately, as if pointed out to him by a god.  He saw him,
bearing an alms bowl, quietly leaving the place, an unassuming man in a yellow cowl.58
"Look," said Siddhartha softly to Govinda, "there is the Buddha."
Govinda looked attentively at the monk in the yellow cowl, who could not be distinguished in any way from
the hundreds of other monks, and yet Govinda soon recognized him.  Yes, it was he, and they followed him
and watched him.
The Buddha went quietly on his way, lost in thought.  His peaceful countenance59 was neither happy nor sad.
He seemed to be smiling gently inwardly.  With a secret smile, not unlike that of a healthy child, he walked
along, peacefully, quietly.  He wore his gown and walked along exactly like the other monks, but his face
and his step, his peaceful downward glance, his peaceful downward-hanging hand, and every finger of his
hand spoke of peace, spoke of completeness, sought nothing, imitated nothing, reflected a continuous quiet,
an unfading light, an invulnerable peace.
And so Gotama wandered into the town to obtain alms, and the two Samanas recognized him only by his
complete peacefulness of demeanor, by the stillness of his form, in which there was no seeking, no will, no
counterfeit, no effort--only light and peace.
"Today we will hear the teachings from his own lips," said Govinda.
Siddhartha did not reply.  He was not very curious about the teachings.  He did not think they would teach
him anything new.  He, as well as Govinda, had heard the substance of the Buddha's teachings, if only from
second and third-hand reports.  But he looked attentively at Gotama's head, at his shoulders, at his feet, at his
still, downward hanging hand, and it seemed to him that in every joint of every finger of his hand there was
knowledge; they spoke, breathed, radiated truth.  This man, this Buddha, was truly a holy man to his
fingertips.  Never had Siddhartha esteemed a man so much, never had he loved a man so much.
They both followed the Buddha into the town and returned in silence.  They themselves intended to abstain
from food that day.  They saw Gotama return, saw him take his meal within the circle of his disciples -- what
he ate would not have satisfied a bird--and saw him withdraw to the shade of the mango tree.
In the evening, however, when the heat abated and everyone in the camp was alert and gathered together,
they heard the Buddha preach.  They heard his voice, and this also was perfect, quiet and full of peace.
Gotama talked about suffering, the origin of suffering, the way to release from suffering.  Life was pain, the
world was full of suffering, but the path to the release from suffering had been found.  There was salvation
for those who went the way of the Buddha.
The Illustrious One spoke in a soft but firm voice, taught the four main points, taught the Eightfold Path;60
patiently he covered the usual method of teaching with examples and repetition.  Clearly and quietly his
voice was carried to his listeners -- like a light, like a star in the heavens.
When the Buddha had finished -- it was already night - many pilgrims came forward and asked to be
accepted into the community, and the Buddha accepted them and said: "You have listened well to the
teachings.  Join us then and walk in bliss; put an end to suffering."
Govinda, the shy one, also stepped forward and said: "I also wish to pay my allegiance to the Illustrious One
and his teachings." He asked to be taken into the community and was accepted.
As soon as the Buddha had withdrawn for the night, Govinda turned to Siddhartha and said eagerly:
"Siddhartha, it is not for me to reproach you.  We have both listened to the Illustrious One, we have both
heard his teachings.  Govinda has listened to the teachings and has accepted them, but you, my dear friend,
will you not also tread the path of salvation?  Will you delay, will you still wait?"
When he heard Govinda's words, Siddhartha awakened as if from a sleep.  He looked at Govinda's face for a
long time.  Then he spoke softly and there was no mockery in his voice.  "Govinda, my friend, you have
taken the step, you have chosen your path.  You have always been my friend, Govinda, you have always
gone a step behind me.  Often I have thought: will Govinda ever take a step without me, from his own
conviction?  Now, you are a man and have chosen your own path.  May you go along it to the end, my
friend.  May you find salvation!"
Govinda, who did not yet fully understand, repeated his question impatiently: "Speak, my dear friend, say
that you also cannot do other than swear allegiance to the Buddha."
Siddhartha placed his hand on Govinda's shoulder.  "You have heard my blessing, Govinda.  I repeat it.
May you travel this path to the end.  May you find salvation!"
In that moment, Govinda realized that his friend was leaving him and he began to weep.
"Siddhartha," he cried.
Siddhartha spoke kindly to him.  "Do not forget, Govinda, that you now belong to the Buddha's holy men.
You have renounced home and parents, you have renounced origin and property, you have renounced your
own will, you have renounced friendship.  That is what the teachings preach, that is the will of the Illustrious
One.  That is what you wished yourself.  Tomorrow, Govinda, I will leave you."
For a long time the friends wandered through the woods.  They lay down for a long time but could not sleep.
Govinda pressed his friend again and again to tell him why he would not follow the Buddha's teachings,
what flaw he found in them, but each time Siddhartha waved him off: "Be at peace, Govinda.  The
Illustrious One's teachings are very good.  How could I find a flaw in them?"
Early in the morning, one of the Buddha's followers, one of his oldest monks, went through the garden and
called to him all the new people who had sworn their allegiance to the teachings, in order to place upon them
the yellow robe and instruct them in the first teachings and duties of their order.  Thereupon Govinda tore
himself away, embraced the friend of his youth, and drew on the monk's robe.
Siddhartha wandered through the grove deep in thought.
There he met Gotama, the Illustrious One, and as he greeted him respectfully and the Buddha's expression
was so full of goodness and peace, the young man plucked up courage and asked the Illustrious One's
permission to speak to him.  Silently the Illustrious One nodded his permission.
Siddhartha said: "Yesterday, O Illustrious One, I had the pleasure of hearing your wonderful teachings.  I
came
from afar with my friend to hear you, and now my friend will remain with you; he has sworn allegiance to
you.  I, however, am continuing my pilgrimage61 anew."
"As you wish," said the Illustrious One politely.
"My talk is perhaps too bold," continued Siddhartha, "but I do not wish to leave the Illustrious One without
sincerely communicating to him my thoughts.  Will the Illustrious One hear me a little longer?"
Silently the Buddha nodded his consent.
Siddhartha said: "O Illustrious One, in one thing above all have I admired your teachings.  Everything is
completely clear and proved.  You show the world as a complete, unbroken chain, an eternal chain, linked
together by cause and effect.  Never has it been presented so clearly, never has it been so irrefutably
demonstrated.  Surely every Brahmin's heart must beat more quickly, when through your teachings he looks
at the world, completely coherent, without a loophole, clear as crystal, not dependent on chance, not
dependent on the gods.  Whether it is good or evil, whether life in itself is pain or pleasure, whether it is
uncertain--that it may perhaps be this is not important--but the unity of the world, the coherence of all
events, the embracing of the big and the small from the same stream, from the same law of cause, of
becoming and dying: this shines clearly from your exalted teachings, O Perfect One.  But according to your
teachings, this unity and logical consequence of all things is broken in one place.  Through a small gap there
streams into the world of unity something strange, something new, something that was not there before and
that cannot be demonstrated and proved: that is your doctrine of rising above the world, of salvation.  With
this small gap, through this small break, however, the eternal and single world law breaks down again.  -
Forgive me if I raise this objection."
Gotama had listened quietly, motionless.  And now the Perfect One spoke in his kind, polite and clear voice.
"You have listened well to the teachings, O Brahmin's son, and it is a credit to you that you have thought so
deeply about them.  You have found a flaw.  Think well about it again.  Let me warn you, you who are
thirsty for knowledge, against the thicket of opinions and the conflict of words.  Opinions mean nothing;
they may be beautiful or ugly, clever or foolish, anyone can embrace or reject them.  The teaching which
you have heard, however, is not my opinion, and its goal is not to explain the world to those who are thirsty
for knowledge.  Its goal is quite different; its goal is salvation from suffering.  That is what Gotama teaches,
nothing else."
"Do not be angry with me, O Illustrious One," said the young man.   "I have not spoken to you thus to
quarrel with you about words.   You are right when you say that opinions mean little, but may I say one
thing more.   I did not doubt you for one moment.   Not for one moment did I doubt that you were the
Buddha, that you have reached the highest goal which so many thousands of Brahmins and Brahmins' sons
are striving to reach.   You have done so by your own seeking, in your own way, through thought, through
meditation, through knowledge, through enlightenment.62   You have learned nothing through teachings, and
so I think, O Illustrious One, that nobody finds salvation through teachings.   To nobody, O Illustrious One,
can you communicate in words and teachings what had opened to you in the hour of your enlightenment.
The teachings of the enlightened Buddha embrace much, they teach much--how to live righteously, how to
avoid evil.   But there is one thing that this clear, worthy instruction does not contain; it does not contain the
secret of what the Illustrious One himself experienced--he alone among hundreds of thousands.  That is what
I thought and realized when I heard your teachings.  That is why I am going on my way-not to seek another
and better doctrine, for I know there is none, but to leave all doctrines and all teachers and to reach my goal
alone--or die.  But I will often remember this day, O Illustrious One, and this hour when my eyes beheld a
holy man."
The Buddha's eyes were lowered, his unfathomable face expressed complete equanimity.
"I hope you are not mistaken in your reasoning," said the Illustrious One slowly.  "May you reach your goal!
But tell me, have you seen my gathering of holy men, my many brothers who have sworn allegiance to the
teachings?  Do you think, O Samana from afar, that it would be better for all these to relinquish the
teachings and to return to the life of the world and desires?"
"That thought never occurred to me," cried Siddhartha.  "May they all follow the teachings! May they reach
their goal! It is not for me to judge another life.  I must judge for myself.  I must choose and reject.  We
Samanas seek release from the Self, O Illustrious One.  If I were one of your followers, I fear that it would
only be on the surface, that I would deceive myself that I was at peace and had attained salvation, while in
truth the Self would continue to live and grow, for it would have been transformed into your teachings, into
my allegiance and love for you and for the community of the monks."
Half smiling, with imperturbable63 brightness and friendliness, the Buddha looked steadily at the stranger
and dismissed him with a hardly visible gesture.
"You are clever, O Samana," said the Illustrious One, "you know how to speak cleverly, my friend.  Be on
your guard against too much cleverness."
The Buddha walked away and his look and half-smile remained imprinted on Siddhartha's memory forever.
I have never seen a man look and smile, sit and walk like that, he thought.  I, also, would like to look and
smile, sit and walk like that, so free, so worthy, so restrained, so candid, so childlike and mysterious.  A man
only looks and walks like that when he has conquered his Self.  I also will conquer my Self.
I have seen one man, one man only, thought Siddhartha, before whom I must lower my eyes.  I will never
lower my eyes before any other man.  No other teachings will attract me, since this man's teachings have not
done so.
The Buddha has robbed me, thought Siddhartha.  He has robbed me, yet he has given me something of
greater value.  He has robbed me of my friend, who believed in me and who now believes in him; he was my
shadow and is now Gotama's shadow.  But he has given to me Siddhartha, myself.
Awakening
As Siddhartha left the grove in which the Buddha, the Perfect One, remained, in which Govinda remained,
he felt that he had also left his former life behind him in the grove.  As he slowly went on his way, his head
was full of this thought.  He reflected deeply, until this feeling completely overwhelmed him and he reached
a point where he recognized causes; for to recognize causes, it seemed to him, is to think, and through
thought alone feelings become knowledge and are not lost, but become real and begin to mature.
Siddhartha reflected deeply as he went on his way.  He realized that he was no longer a youth; he was now a
man.  He realized that something had left him, like the old skin that a snake sheds.  Something was no longer
in him, something that had accompanied him right through his youth and was part of him: this was the desire
to have teachers and to listen to their teachings.  He had left the last teacher he had met, even he, the greatest
and wisest teacher, the holiest, the Buddha.  He had to leave him; he could not accept his teachings.
Slowly the thinker went on his way and asked himself: What is it that you wanted to learn from teachings
and teachers, and although they taught you much, what was it they could not teach you?  And he thought: It
was the Self, the character and nature of which I wished to learn.  I wanted to rid myself of the Self, to
conquer it, but I could not conquer it, I could only deceive it, could only fly from it, could only hide from it.
Truly, nothing in the world has occupied my thoughts as much as the Self, this riddle, that I live, that I am
one and am separated and different from everybody else, that I am Siddhartha; and about nothing in the
world do I know less than about myself, about Siddhartha.
The thinker, slowly going on his way, suddenly stood still, gripped by this thought, and another thought
immediately arose from this one.  It was: The reason why I do not know anything about myself, the reason
why Siddhartha has remained alien and unknown to myself is due to one thing, to one single thing i was
afraid of myself, I was fleeing from myself.  I was seeking Brahman, Atman, I wished to destroy myself, to
get away from myself, in order to find in the unknown innermost, the nucleus of all things, Atman, Life, the
Divine,64 the Absolute.65  But by doing so, I lost myself on the way.
Siddhartha looked up and around him, a smile crept over his face, and a strong feeling of awakening from a
long dream spread right through his being.  Immediately he walked on again, quickly, like a man who knows
what he has to do.
Yes, he thought breathing deeply, I will no longer try to escape from Siddhartha.  'I will no longer devote my
thoughts to Atman and the sorrows of the world.  I will no longer mutilate and destroy myself in order to
find a secret behind the ruins.  I will no longer study Yoga66-Veda, Atharva-Veda,67 or asceticism, or any
other teachings.  I will learn from myself, be my own pupil; I will learn from myself the secret of
Siddhartha.
He looked around him as if seeing the world for the first time.  The world was beautiful, strange and
mysterious.  Here was blue, here was yellow, here was green, sky and river, woods and mountains, all
beautiful, all mysterious and enchanting, and in the midst of it, he, Siddhartha, the awakened one, on the
way to himself.  All this, all this yellow and blue, river and wood, passed for the first time across
Siddhartha's eyes.  It was no longer the magic of Mara,68 it was no more the veil of Maya,69 it was no longer
meaningless and the chance diversities of the appearances of the world, despised by deep-thinking
Brahmins, who scorned diversity, who sought unity.  River was river, and if the One and Divine in
Siddhartha secretly lived in blue and river, it was just the divine art and intention that there should be yellow
and blue, there sky and wood-and here Siddhartha.  Meaning and reality were not hidden somewhere behind
things, they were in them, in all of them.
How deaf and stupid I have been, he thought, walking on quickly.  When anyone reads anything which he
wishes to study, he does not despise the letters and punctuation marks, and call them illusion, chance and
worthless shells, but he reads them, he studies and loves them, letter by letter.  But I, who wished to read the
book of the world and the book of my own nature, did presume to despise the letters and signs.  I called the
world of appearances, illusion.  I called my eyes and tongue, chance.  Now it is over; I have awakened.  I
have indeed awakened and have only been born today.
But as these thoughts passed through Siddhartha's mind, he suddenly stood still, as if a snake lay in his path.
Then suddenly this also was clear to him: he, who was in fact like one who had awakened or was newly
born, must begin his life completely afresh.  When he left the Jetavana grove that morning, the grove of the
Illustrious One, already awakened, already on the way to himself, it was his intention and it seemed the
natural course for him after the years of his asceticism to return to his home and his father.  Now, however,
in that moment as he stood still, as if a snake lay in his path, this thought also came to him: I am no longer
what I was, I am no longer an ascetic, no longer a priest, no longer a Brahmin.  What then shall I do at home
with my father?  Study?  Offer sacrifices?  Practice meditation?  All this is over for me now.
Siddhartha stood still and for a moment an icy chill stole over him.  He shivered inwardly like a small
animal, like a bird or a hare, when he realized how alone he was.  He had been homeless for years and had
not felt like this.  Now he did feel it.  Previously, when in deepest meditation, he was still his father's son, he
was a Brahmin of high standing, a religious man.  Now he was only Siddhartha, the awakened; otherwise
nothing else.  He breathed in deeply and for a moment he shuddered.  Nobody was so alone as he.  He was
no nobleman, belonging to any aristocracy, no artisan belonging to any guild and finding refuge in it,
sharing its life and language.  He was no Brahmin, sharing the life of the Brahmins, no ascetic belonging to
the Samanas.  Even the most secluded hermit in the woods was not one and alone; he also belonged to a
class of people.  Govinda had become a monk and thousands of monks were his brothers, wore the same
gown, shared his beliefs and spoke his language.  But he, Siddhartha, where did he belong?  Whose life
would he share?  Whose language would he speak?
At that moment, when the world around him melted away, when he stood alone like a star in the heavens, he
was overwhelmed by a feeling of icy despair, but he was more firmly himself than ever.  That was the last
shudder of his awakening, the last pains of birth.  Immediately he moved on again and began to walk quickly
and impatiently, no longer homewards, no longer to his father, no longer looking backwards.
Part Two
Kamala
Siddhartha learned something new on every step of his path, for the world was transformed and he was
enthralled.  He saw the sun rise over forest and mountains and set over the distant palm shore.  At night he
saw the stars in the heavens and the sickle70-shaped moon floating like a boat in the blue.  He saw trees,
stars, animals, clouds, rainbows, rocks, weeds, flowers, brook and river, the sparkle of dew on bushes in the
morning, distant high mountains blue and pale; birds sang, bees hummed, the wind blew gently across the
rice fields.  All this, colored and in a thousand different forms, had always been there.  The sun and moon
had always shone; the rivers had always flowed and the bees had hummed, but in previous times all this had
been nothing to Siddhartha but a fleeting and illusive veil before his eyes, regarded with distrust, condemned
to be disregarded and ostracized71 from the thoughts, because it was not reality, because reality lay on the
other side of the visible.  But now his eyes lingered on this side; he saw and recognized the visible and he
sought his place in this world.  He did not seek reality; his goal was not on any other side.  The world was
beautiful when looked at in this way - without any seeking, so simple, so childlike.  The moon and the stars
were beautiful, the brook, the shore, the forest and rock, the goat and the golden beetle, the flower and
butterfly were beautiful.  It was beautiful and pleasant to go through the world like that, so childlike, so
awakened, so concerned with the immediate, without any distrust.  Elsewhere, the sun burned fiercely,
elsewhere there was cool in the forest shade; elsewhere there were pumpkins and bananas.  The days and
nights were short, every hour passed quickly like a sail on the sea, beneath the sail of a ship full of treasures,
full of joy.  Siddhartha saw a group of monkeys in the depths of the forest, moving about high in the
branches, and heard their wild eager cries.  Siddhartha saw a ram follow a sheep and mate.  In a lake of
rushes he saw the pike72 making chase in evening hunger.  Swarms of young fishes, fluttering and glistening,
moved anxiously away from it.  Strength and desire were reflected in the swiftly moving whirls of water
formed by the raging pursuer.
All this had always been and he had never seen it; he was never present.  Now he was present and belonged
to it.  Through his eyes he saw light and shadows; through his mind he was aware of moon and stars.
On the way, Siddhartha remembered all that he had experienced in the garden of Jetavana, the teachings that
he had heard there from the holy Buddha, the parting from Govinda and the conversation with the Illustrious
One.  He remembered each word that he had said to the Illustrious One, and he was astonished that he had
said things which he did not then really know.  What he had said to the Buddha - that the Buddha's wisdom
and secret was not teachable, that it was inexpressible and incommunicable - and which he had once
experienced in an hour of enlightenment, was just what he had now set off to experience, what he was now
beginning to experience.  He must gain experience himself.  He had known for a long time that his Self was
Atman, of the same eternal nature as Brahman, but he had never really found his Self, because he had
wanted to trap it in the net of thoughts.  The body was certainly not the Self, nor the play of senses, nor
thought, nor understanding, nor acquired wisdom or art with which to draw conclusions and from already
existing thoughts to spin new thoughts.  No, this world of thought was still on this side, and it led to no goal
when one destroyed the senses of the incidental Self but fed it with thoughts and erudition.73  Both thought
and the senses were fine things, behind both of them lay hidden the last meaning; it was worth while
listening to them both, to play with both, neither to despise nor overrate either of them, but to listen intently
to both voices.  He would only strive after whatever the inward voice commanded him, not tarry74 anywhere
but where the voice advised him.  Why did Gotama once sit down beneath the bo tree75 in his greatest hour
when he received enlightenment?  He had heard a voice, a voice in his own heart which commanded him to
seek rest under this tree, and he had not taken recourse to mortification of the flesh, sacrifices, bathings or
prayers, eating or drinking, sleeping or dreaming; he had listened to the voice.  To obey no other external
command, only the voice, to be prepared - that was good, that was necessary.  Nothing else was necessary.
During the night, as he slept in a ferryman's straw hut, Siddhartha had a dream.  He dreamt that Govinda
stood before him, in the yellow robe of the ascetic.  Govinda looked sad and asked him, "Why did you leave
me?"  Thereupon he embraced Govinda, put his arm round him, and as he drew him to his breast and kissed
him, he was Govinda no longer, but a woman and out of the woman's gown emerged a full breast, and
Siddhartha lay there and drank; sweet and strong tasted the milk from this breast.  It tasted of woman and
man, of sun and forest, of animal and flower, of every fruit, of every pleasure.  It was intoxicating.  When
Siddhartha awoke, the pale river shimmered past the door of the hut, and in the forest the cry of an owl rang
out, deep and clear.
As the day began, Siddhartha asked his host, the ferryman, to take him across the river.  The ferryman took
him across on his bamboo raft.  The broad sheet of water glimmered pink in the light of the morning.
"It is a beautiful river," he said to his companion.
"Yes," said the ferryman, it is a very beautiful river.  I love it above everything.  I have often listened to it,
gazed at it, and I have always learned something from it.  One can learn much from a river."
"Thank you, good man," said Siddhartha, as he landed on the other side.  "I am afraid I have no gift to give
you, nor any payment.  I am homeless, a Brahman's son and a Samana."
"I could see that," said the ferryman, "and I did not expect any payment or gift from you.  You will give it to
me some other time."
"Do you think so?" asked Siddhartha merrily.
"Certainly.  I have learned that from the river too; everything comes back; You, too, Samana, will come
back.  Now farewell, may your friendship be my payment! May you think of me when you sacrifice to the
gods!"
Smiling, they parted from each other.  Siddhartha was pleased at the ferryman's friendliness.  He is like
Govinda, he thought, smiling.  All whom I meet on the way are like Govinda.  All are grateful, although they
themselves deserve thanks.  All are subservient, all wish to be my friend, to obey and to think little.  People
are children.
At midday he passed through a village.  Children danced about in the lane in front of the clay huts.  They
played with pumpkin-stones and mussels.  They shouted and wrestled with each other, but ran away timidly
when the strange Samana appeared.  At the end of the village, the path went alongside a brook, and at the
edge of the brook a young woman was kneeling and washing clothes.  When Siddhartha greeted her, she
raised her head and looked at him with a smile, so that he could see the whites of her eyes shining.  He
called across a benediction,76 as is customary among travellers, and asked how far the road still was to the
large town.  Thereupon she stood up and came towards him, her moist lips gleaming attractively in her
young face.  She exchanged light remarks with him, asked him if he had yet eaten, and whether it was true
that the Samanas slept alone in the forest at night and were not allowed to have any women with them.  She
then placed her left foot on his right and made a gesture, such as a woman makes when she invites a man to
that kind of enjoyment of love which the holy books call "ascending the tree.   Siddhartha felt his blood
kindle, and as he recognized his dream again at that moment, he stooped a little towards the woman and
kissed the brown tip of her breast.  Looking up he saw her face smiling, full of desire and her half-closed
eyes pleading with longing.
Siddhartha also felt a longing and the stir of sex in him; but as he had never yet touched a woman, he
hesitated a moment, although his hands were ready to seize her.  At that moment he heard his inward voice
and the voice said "No!" Then all the magic disappeared from the young woman's smiling face; he saw
nothing but the ardent glance of a passionate young woman.  Gently he stroked her cheek and quickly
disappeared from the disappointed woman into the bamboo wood.
Before evening of that day he reached a large town and he was glad, because he had a desire to be with
people.  He had lived in the woods for a long time and the ferryman's straw hut, in which he had slept the
previous night, was the first roof he had had over him for a long time.
Outside the town, by a beautiful unfenced grove, the wanderer met a small train of men and women servants
loaded with baskets.  In the middle, in an ornamented sedan chair77 carried by four people, sat a woman, the
mistress, on red cushions beneath a colored awning.  Siddhartha stood still at the entrance to the grove and
watched the procession, the men servants, the maids and the baskets.  He looked at the sedan chair and the
lady in it.  Beneath heaped-up black hair he saw a bright, very sweet, very clever face, a bright red mouth
like a freshly cut fig, artful eyebrows painted in a high arch, dark eyes, clever and observant, and a clear
slender neck above her green and gold gown.  The woman's hands were firm and smooth, long and slender,
with broad gold bangles on her wrists.
Siddhartha saw how beautiful she was and his heart rejoiced.  He bowed low as the sedan chair passed close
by him, and raising himself again, gazed at the bright fair face, and for a moment into the clever arched eyes,
and inhaled the fragrance of a perfume which he did not recognize.  For a moment the beautiful woman
nodded and smiled, then disappeared into the grove, followed by her servants.
And so, thought Siddhartha, I enter this town under a lucky star.  He felt the urge to enter the grove
immediately, but he thought it over, for it had just occurred to him how the men servants and maids had
looked at him at the entrance, so scornfully, so distrustfully, so dismissing in their glance.
I am still a Samana, he thought, still an ascetic and a beggar.  I cannot remain one; I cannot enter the grove
like this.  And he laughed.
He enquired from the first people that he met about the grove and the woman's name, and learned that it was
the grove of Kamala,78 the well-known courtesan,79 and that besides the grove she owned a house in the
town.
Then he entered the town.  He had only one goal.  Pursuing it, he surveyed the town, wandered about in the
maze of streets, stood still in places, and rested on the stone steps to the river.  Towards evening he made
friends with a barber's assistant, whom he had seen working in the shade of an arch.  He found him again at
prayer in the temple of Vishnu,80 where he related to him stories about Vishnu and Lakshmi.81  During the
night he slept among the boats on the river, and early in the morning, before the first customers arrived in
the shop, he had his beard shaved off by the barber's assistant.  He also had his hair combed and rubbed with
fine oil.  Then he went to bathe in the river.
When the beautiful Kamala was approaching her grove late in the afternoon in her sedan chair, Siddhartha
was at the entrance.  He bowed and received the courtesan's greeting.  He beckoned the servant who was last
in the procession, and asked him to announce to his mistress that a young Brahmin desired to speak to her.
After a time the servant returned, asked Siddhartha to follow him, conducted him silently into a pavilion,
where Kamala lay on a couch, and left him.
"Did you not stand outside yesterday and greet me?" asked Kamala.
"Yes indeed.  I saw you yesterday and greeted you."
"But did you not have a beard and long hair yesterday, and dust in your hair?"
"You have observed well, you have seen everything.  You have seen Siddhartha, the Brahmin's son, who left
his home in order to become a Samana, and who was a Samana for three years.  Now, however, I have left
that path and have come to this town, and the first person I met before I reached the town was you.  I have
come here to tell you, O Kamala, that you are the first woman to whom Siddhartha has spoken without
lowered eyes.  Never again will I lower my eyes when I meet a beautiful woman.
Kamala smiled and played with her fan made of peacocks' feathers, and asked: "Is that all that Siddhartha
has come to tell me?"
"I have come to tell you this and to thank you because you are so beautiful.  And if it does not displease you,
Kamala, I would like to ask you to be my friend and teacher, for I do not know anything of the art of which
you are mistress."
Thereupon Kamala laughed aloud.
"It has never been my experience that a Samana from the woods should come to me and desire to learn from
me.  Never has a Samana with long hair and an old torn loincloth come to me.  Many young men come to
me, including Brahmins' sons, but they come to me in fine clothes, in fine
shoes; there is scent in their hair and money in their purses.  That is how these young men come to me, O
Samana."
Siddhartha said: "I am already beginning to learn from you.  I already learned something yesterday.  Already
I have got rid of my beard, I have combed and oiled my hair.  There is not much more that is lacking, most
excellent lady: fine clothes, fine shoes and money in my purse.  Siddhartha has undertaken to achieve more
difficult things than these trifles and has attained them.  Why should I not attain what I decided to undertake
yesterday?-to be your friend and to learn the pleasures of love from you.  You will find me an apt pupil,
Kamala.  I have learned more difficult things than what you have to teach me.  So Siddhartha is not good
enough for you as he with oil in his hair, but without clothes, without shoes and without money!"
Kamala laughed and said: "No, he is not yet good enough.  He must have clothes, fine clothes, and shoes,
fine shoes, and plenty of money in his purse and presents for Kamala.  Do you know now, Samana from the
woods?  Do you understand?"
"I understand very well, cried Siddhartha.  "How could I fail to understand when it comes from such a
mouth?  Your mouth is like a freshly cut fig, Kamala.  My lips are also red and fresh, and will fit yours well,
you will see.  But tell me, fair Kamala, are you not at all afraid of the Samana from the forest, who has come
to learn about love?"
"Why should I be afraid of a Samana, a stupid Samana from the forest, who comes from the jackals and does
not know anything about women?"
"Oh, the Samana is strong and afraid of nothing.  He could force you, fair maiden, he could rob you, he
could hurt you."
"No, Samana, I am not afraid.  Has a Samana or a Brahmin ever feared that someone could come and strike
him and rob him of his knowledge, of his piety, of his power for depth of thought?  No, because they belong
to himself, and he can only give of them what he wishes, and if he wishes.  That is exactly how it is with
Kamala and with the pleasures of love.  Fair and red are Kamala's lips, but try to kiss them against Kamala's
will, and not one drop of sweetness will you obtain from them-although they know well how to give
sweetness.  You are an apt pupil, Siddhartha, so learn also this.  One can beg, buy, be presented with and
find love in the streets, but it can never be stolen.  You have misunderstood.  Yes, it would be a pity if a fine
young man like you misunderstood."
Siddhartha bowed and smiled.  "You are right, Kamala, it would be a pity.  It would be a very great pity.
No, no drops of sweetness must be lost from your lips, nor from mine.  So Siddhartha will come again when
he has what he is lacking in-clothes, shoes, money.  But tell me, fair Kamala, can you not give me a little
advice?"
"Advice?  Why not?  Who would not willingly give advice to a poor, ignorant Samana who comes from the
jackals in the forest?"
"Dear Kamala, where can I go in order to obtain these three things as quickly as possible?"
"My friend, many people want to know that.  You must do what you have learned and obtain money, clothes
and shoes for it.  A poor man cannot obtain money otherwise.
"I can think, I can wait, I can fast." "Nothing else?"
"Nothing.  O yes, I can compose poetry.  Will you give me a kiss for a poem?"
"I will do so if your poem pleases me.  What is it called?"
After thinking a moment, Siddhartha recited this verse:
"Into her grove went the fair Kamala,
At the entrance to the grove stood the brown Samana.
As he saw the lotus flower,82
Deeply he bowed.
Smiling, acknowledged Kamala,
Better, thought the young Samana
To make sacrifices to the fair Kamala
Than to offer sacrifices to the gods."
Kamala clapped her hands loudly, so that the golden bangles tinkled.
"Your poetry is very good, brown Samana, and truly there is nothing to lose if I give you a kiss for it."
She drew him to her with her eyes.  He put his face against hers, placed his lips against hers, which were like
a freshly cut fig.  Kamala kissed him deeply, and to Siddhartha's great astonishment he felt how much she
taught him, how clever she was, how she mastered him, repulsed him, lured him, and how after this long
kiss, a long series of other kisses, all different, awaited him.  He stood still breathing deeply.  At that
moment he was like a child astonished at the fullness of knowledge and learning which unfolded itself
before his eyes.
"Your poetry is very good," said Kamala, "if I were rich I would give you money for it.  But it will be hard
for you to earn as much money as you want with poetry.  For you will need much money if you want to be
Kamala's friend."
"How you can kiss, Kamala!" stammered Siddhartha.  "Yes, indeed, that is why I am not lacking in clothes,
shoes, bangles and all sorts of pretty things.  But what are you going to do?  Cannot you do anything else
besides think, fast and compose poetry?"
"I also know the sacrificial songs," said Siddhartha, "but I will not sing them any more.  I also know
incantations,83 but I will not pronounce them any more.  I have read the scriptures …"
"Wait," interrupted Kamala, "you can read and write?"
"Certainly I can.  Many people can do that."
"Not most people.  I cannot.  It is very good that you know how to read and write, very good.  You might
even need the incantations."
At that moment a servant entered and whispered something in his mistress's ear.
"I have a visitor," said Kamala.  "Hurry and disappear, Siddhartha, nobody must see you here.  I will see you
again tomorrow."
However, she ordered the servant to give the holy Brahmin a white gown.  Without quite knowing what was
happening, Siddhartha was led away by the servant, conducted by a circuitous route to a garden house,
presented with a gown, let into the thicket and expressly instructed to leave the grove unseen, as quickly as
possible.
Contentedly, he did what he was told.  Accustomed to the forest, he made his way silently out of the grove
and over the hedge.  Contentedly, he returned to the town, carrying his rolled-up gown under his arm.  He
stood at the door of an inn where travellers met, silently begged for food and silently accepted a piece of rice
cake.  Perhaps tomorrow, he thought, I will not need to beg for food.
He was suddenly overwhelmed with a feeling of pride.
He was a Samana no longer; it was no longer fitting that he should beg.  He gave the rice cake to a dog and
remained without food.
The life that is lived here is simple, thought Siddhartha.  It has no difficulties.  Everything was difficult,
irksome and finally hopeless when I was a Samana.  Now everything is easy, as easy as the instruction in
kissing which Kamala gives.  I require clothes and money, that is all.  These are easy goals which do not
disturb one's sleep.
He had long since enquired about Kamala's town house and called there the next day.
"Things are going well," she called across to him.  "Kamaswami84 expects you to call on him; he is the
richest merchant in the town.  If you please him, he will take you into his service.  Be clever, brown
Samana!  I had your name mentioned to him through others.  Be friendly towards him; he is very powerful,
but do not be too modest.  I do not want you to be his servant, but his equal; otherwise I shall not be pleased
with you.  Kamaswami is beginning to grow old and indolent.  If you please him, he will place great
confidence in you."
Siddhartha thanked her and laughed, and when she learned that he had not eaten that day nor the previous
day, she ordered bread and fruit to be brought to him and attended him.
"You have been lucky," she said to him on parting, "one door after the other is being opened to you.  How
does that come about?  Have you a charm?"
Siddhartha said: "Yesterday I told you I knew how to think, to wait and to fast, but you did not consider
these useful.  But you will see that they are very useful, Kamala.  You will see that the stupid Samanas in the
forest learn and know many useful things.  The day before yesterday I was still an unkempt beggar;
yesterday I already kissed Kamala and soon I will be a merchant and have money and all those things which
you value."
"Quite," she agreed, "but how would you have fared without me?  Where would you be if Kamala did not
help you?"
"My dear Kamala," said Siddhartha, "when I came to you in your grove I made the first step.  It was my
intention to learn about love from the most beautiful woman.  From the moment I made that resolution I also
knew that I would execute it.  I knew that you would help me; I knew it from your first glance at the
entrance to the grove."
"And if I had not wanted?"
"But you did want.  Listen, Kamala, when you throw a stone into the water, it finds the quickest way to the
bottom of the water.  It is the same when Siddhartha has an aim, a goal.  Siddhartha does nothing; he waits,
he thinks, he fasts, but he goes through the affairs of the world like the stone through the water, without
doing anything, without bestirring himself; he is drawn and lets himself fall.  He is drawn by his goal, for he
does not allow anything to enter his mind which opposes his goal.  That is what Siddhartha learned from the
Samanas.  It is what fools call magic and what they think is caused by demons.  Nothing is caused by
demons; there are no demons.  Everyone can perform magic, everyone can reach his goal, if he can think,
wait and fast."
Kamala listened to him.  She loved his voice, she loved the look in his eyes.
"Perhaps it is as you say, my friend," she said softly, "and perhaps it is also because Siddhartha is a
handsome man, because his glance pleases women, that he is lucky."
Siddhartha kissed her and said good-bye.  "May it be so, my teacher.  May my glance always please you,
may good fortune always come to me from you!"
Amongst the People
Siddhartha went to see Kamaswami the merchant, and was shown into a rich house.  Servants conducted him
across costly carpets to a room where he waited for the master of the house.
Kamaswami came in, a supple, lively man with graying hair, with clever, prudent eyes and a sensual mouth.
Master and visitor greeted each other in a friendly manner.
"I have been told," the merchant began, "that you are a Brahmin, a learned man but that you seek service
with a merchant.  Are you then in need, Brahmin, that you seek service?"
"No, replied Siddhartha I am not in need and I have never been in need.  I have come from the Samanas with
whom I lived a long time."
"If you come from the Samanas how is it that you are not in need?  Are not all the Samanas completely
without possessions?"
"I possess nothing," said Siddhartha, "if that is what you mean.  I am certainly without possessions, but of
my own free will, so I am not in need."
"But how will you live if you are without possessions?"
"I have never thought about it, sir.  I have been without possessions for nearly three years and I have never
thought on what I should live."
"So you have lived on the possessions of others?"
"Apparently.  The merchant also lives on the possessions of others."
"Well spoken, but he does not take from others for nothing, he gives his goods in exchange."
"That seems to be the way of things.  Everyone takes, everyone gives.  Life is like that."
"Ah, but if you are without possessions, how can you give?"
"Everyone gives what he has.  The soldier gives strength, the merchant goods, the teacher instruction, the
farmer rice, the fisherman fish."
"Very well and what can you give?  What have you learned that you can give?"
"I can think, I can wait, I can fast." "Is that all?" "I think that is all."
"And of what use are they?  For example, fasting, what good is that?"
"It is of great value, sir.  If a man has nothing to eat, fasting is the most intelligent thing he can do.  If, for
instance, Siddhartha had not learned how to fast, he would have had to seek some kind of work today, either
with you, or elsewhere, for hunger would have driven him.  But as it is, Siddhartha can wait calmly.  He is
not impatient, he is not in need, he can ward off hunger for a long time and laugh at it.  Therefore, fasting is
useful, sir."
"You are right, Samana.  Wait a moment."
Kamaswami went out and returned with a roll which he handed to his guest and enquired: "Can you read
this?"
Siddhartha looked at the roll, on which a sales agreement was written, and began to read the contents.
"Excellent," said Kamaswami, "and will you write something for me on this sheet?"
He gave him a sheet and a pen and Siddhartha wrote something and returned the sheet.
Kamaswami read:  "Writing is good, thinking is better.  Cleverness is good, patience is better."
"You write very well," the merchant praised him.  "We shall still have plenty to discuss but today I invite
you to be my guest and to live in my house."
Siddhartha thanked him and accepted.  He now lived in the merchant's house.  Clothes and shoes were
brought to him and a servant prepared him a bath daily.  Splendid meals were served twice a day but
Siddhartha only ate once a day, and neither ate meat nor drank wine.  Kamaswami talked to him about his
business, showed him goods and warehouses and accounts.  Siddhartha learned many new things; he heard
much and said little.  And remembering Kamala's words, he was never servile to the merchant, but
compelled him to treat him as an equal and even more than his equal.  Kamaswami conducted his business
with care and often with passion, but Siddhartha regarded it all as a game, the rules of which he endeavored
to learn well, but which did not stir his heart.
He was not long in Kamaswami's house, when he was already taking a part in his master's business.  Daily,
however, at the hour she invited him, he visited the beautiful Kamala, in handsome clothes, in fine shoes and
soon he also brought her presents.  He learned many things from her wise red lips.  Her smooth gentle hand
taught him many things.  He, who was still a boy as regards love and was inclined to plunge to the depths of
it blindly and insatiably, was taught by her that one cannot have pleasure without giving it, and that every
gesture, every caress, every touch, every glance, every single part of the body has its secret which can give
pleasure to one who can understand.  She taught him that lovers should not separate from each other after
making love without admiring each other, without being conquered as well as conquering, so that no feeling
of satiation85 or desolation arises nor the horrid feeling of misusing or having been misused.  He spent
wonderful hours with the clever, beautiful courtesan and became her pupil, her lover, her friend.  Here with
Kamala lay the value and meaning of his present life, not in Kamaswami's business.
The merchant passed on to him the writing of important letters and orders, and grew accustomed to
conferring with him about all important affairs.  He soon saw that Siddhartha understood little about rice and
wool, shipping and trade, but that he had a happy knack and surpassed the merchant in calmness and
equanimity, and in the art of listening and making a good impression on strange people.  "This Brahmin," he
said to a friend, "is no real merchant and will never be one; he is never absorbed in the business.  But he has
the secret of those people to whom success comes by itself, whether it is due to being born under a lucky star
or whether it is magic, or whether he has learned it from the Samanas.  He always seems to be playing at
business, it never makes much impression on him, it never masters him, he never fears failure, he is never
worried about a loss."
The friend advised the merchant: "Give him a third of the profits of the business which he conducts for you,
but let him share the same proportion of losses if any arise.
He will thus become more enthusiastic."
Kamaswami followed his advice, but Siddhartha was little concerned about it.  If he made a profit, he
accepted it calmly; if he suffered a loss, he laughed and said, "Oh well, this transaction has gone badly."
He did, in fact, seem indifferent about business.  Once he travelled to a village in order to buy a large rice
harvest.  When he arrived there, the rice was already sold to another merchant.  However, Siddhartha
remained in that village several days, entertained the farmers, gave money to the children, attended a
wedding and returned from the journey completely satisfied.  Kamaswami reproached him for not returning
immediately, for wasting time and money.  Siddhartha replied: "Do not scold, my dear friend.  Nothing was
ever achieved by scolding.  If a loss has been sustained, I will bear the loss.  I am very satisfied with this
journey.  I have become acquainted with many people, I have become friendly with a Brahmin, children
have sat on my knee, farmers have showed me their fields.  Nobody took me for a merchant."
"That is all very fine," admitted Kamaswami reluctantly, "but you are in fact a merchant.  Or were you only
travelling for your pleasure?"
"Certainly I travelled for my pleasure," laughed Siddhartha.  "Why not?  I have become acquainted with
people and new districts.  I have enjoyed friendship and confidence.  Now, if I had been Kamaswami, I
should have departed immediately feeling very annoyed when I saw I was unable to make a purchase, and
time and money would indeed have been lost.  But I spent a number of good days, learned much, had much
pleasure and did not hurt either myself or others through annoyance or hastiness.  If I ever go there again,
perhaps to buy a later harvest, or for some other purpose, friendly people will receive me and I will be glad
that I did not previously display hastiness and displeasure.  Anyway, let it rest, my friend, and do not hurt
yourself by scolding.  If the day comes when you think: this Siddhartha is doing me harm, just say one word
and Siddhartha will go on his way.  Until then, however, let us be good friends."
The merchant's attempts to convince Siddhartha that he was eating his, Kamaswami's, bread were also in
vain.  Siddhartha ate his own bread; moreover, they all ate the bread of others, everybody's bread.
Siddhartha was never concerned about Kamaswami's troubles and Kamaswami had many troubles.  If a
transaction threatened to be unsuccessful, if a consignment of goods was lost, if a debtor appeared unable to
pay, Kamaswami could never persuade his colleague that it served any purpose to utter troubled or angry
words, to form wrinkles on the forehead and sleep badly.  When kamaswami once reminded him that he had
learned everything from him, he replied: "Do not make such jokes.  I have learned from you how much a
basket of fish costs and how much interest one can claim for lending money.  That is your knowledge.  But I
did not learn how to think from you, my dear Kamaswami.  It would be better if you learned that from me."
His heart was not indeed in business.  It was useful in order to bring him money for Kamala, and it brought
him more than he really needed.  Moreover, Siddhartha's sympathy and curiosity lay only with people,
whose work, troubles, pleasures and follies were more unknown and remote from him than the moon.
Although he found it so easy to speak to everyone, to live with everyone, to learn from everyone, he was
very conscious of the fact that there was something which separated him from them-and this was due to the
fact that he had been a Samana.  He saw people living in a childish or animal-like way, which he both loved
and despised.  He saw them toiling, saw them suffer and grow gray about things that to him did not seem
worth the price-for money, small pleasures and trivial honors.  He saw them scold and hurt each other; he
saw them lament over pains at which the Samana laughs, and suffer at deprivations which a Samana does
not feel.
He accepted all that people brought to him.  The merchant who brought him linen for sale was welcome; the
debtor who sought a loan was welcome, the beggar was welcome who stayed an hour telling him the story of
his poverty, and who was yet not as poor as any Samana.  He did not treat the rich foreign merchant
differently from the servant who shaved him and the peddlers, from whom he bought bananas and let
himself be robbed of small coins.  If Kamaswami came to him and told him his troubles or made him
reproaches about a transaction he listened curiously and attentively, was amazed at him, tried to understand
him, conceded to him a little where it seemed necessary and turned away from him to the next one who
wanted him.  And many people came to him-many to trade with him, many to deceive him, many to listen to
him, many to elicit his sympathy, many to listen to his advice.  He gave advice, he sympathized, he gave
presents, he allowed himself to be cheated a little, and he occupied his thoughts with all this game and the
passion with which all men play it, as much as he had previously occupied his thoughts with the gods and
Brahman.
At times he heard within him a soft, gentle voice, which reminded him quietly, complained quietly, so that
he could hardly hear it.  Then he suddenly saw clearly that he was leading a strange life, that he was doing
many things that were only a game, that he was quite cheerful and sometimes experienced pleasure, but that
real life was flowing past him and did not touch him.  Like a player who plays with his ball, he played with
his business, with the people around him, watched them, derived amusement from them; but with his heart,
with his real nature, he was not there.  His real self wandered elsewhere, far away, wandered on and on
invisibly and had nothing to do with his life.  He was sometimes afraid of these thoughts and wished that he
could also share their childish daily affairs with intensity, truly to take part in them, to enjoy and live their
lives instead of only being there as an onlooker.
He visited the beautiful Kamala regularly, learned the art of love in which, more than anything else, giving
and taking become one.  He talked to her, learned from her, gave her advice, received advice.  She
understood him better than Govinda had once done.  She was more like him.
Once he said to her: "You are like me; you are different from other people.  You are Kamala and no one
else, and within you there is a stillness and sanctuary to which you can retreat at any time and be yourself,
just as I can.  Few people have that capacity and yet everyone could have it."
"Not all people are clever," said Kamala.
"It has nothing to do with that, Kamala," said Siddhartha.  "Kamaswami is just as clever as I am and yet he
has no sanctuary.  Others have it who are only children in understanding.  Most people, Kamala, are like a
falling leaf that drifts and turns in the air, flutters, and falls to the ground.  But a few others are like stars
which travel one defined path: no wind reaches them, they have within themselves their guide and path.
Among all the wise men, of whom I knew many, there was one who was perfect in this respect.  I can never
forget him.  He is Gotama, the Illustrious One, who preaches this gospel.  Thousands of young men hear his
teachings every day and follow his instructions every hour, but they are all falling leaves; they have not the
wisdom and guide within themselves."
Kamala looked at him and smiled.  "You are talking about him again," she said.  "Again you have Samana
thoughts."
Siddhartha was silent, and they played the game of love, one of the thirty or forty different games which
Kamala knew.  Her body was as supple as a jaguar and a hunter's bow; whoever learned about love from her,
learned many pleasures, many secrets.  She played with Siddhartha for a long time, repulsed him,
overwhelmed him, conquered him, rejoiced at her mastery, until he was overcome and lay exhausted at her
side.
The courtesan bent over him and looked long at his face, into his eyes that had grown tired.
"You are the best lover that I have had, she said thoughtfully.  "You are stronger than others, more supple,
more willing.  You have learned my art well, Siddhartha.  Some day, when I am older, I will have a child by
you.  And yet, my dear, you have remained a Samana.  You do not really love me-you love nobody.  Is that
not true?"
"Maybe," said Siddhartha wearily.  "I am like you.  You cannot love either, otherwise how could you
practice love as an art?  Perhaps people like us cannot love.  Ordinary people can-that is their secret."
Samsara
For a long time Siddhartha had lived the life of the world without belonging to it.  His senses, which he had
deadened during his ardent Samana years, were again awakened.  He had tasted riches, passion and power,
but for a long time he remained a Samana in his heart.  Clever Kamala had recognized this.  His life was
always directed by the art of thinking, waiting and fasting.  The people of the world, the ordinary people,
were still alien to him, just as he was apart from them.
The years passed by.  Enveloped by comfortable circumstances, Siddhartha hardly noticed their passing.  He
had become rich.  He had long possessed a house of his own and his own servants, and a garden at the
outskirts of the town, by the river.  People liked him; they came to him if they wanted money or advice.
However, with the exception of Kamala, he had no close friends.
That glorious, exalted awakening which he had once experienced in his youth, in the days after Gotama's
preaching, after the parting from Govinda, that alert expectation, that pride of standing alone without
teachers and doctrines, that eager readiness to hear the divine voice within his own heart had gradually
become a memory, had passed.  The only fountainhead which had once been near and which had once sung
loudly within him, now murmured softly in the distance.  However, many things which he had learned from
the Samanas, which he had learned from Gotama, from his father, from the Brahmins, he still retained for a
long time: a moderate life, pleasure in thinking hours of meditation, secret knowledge of the Self, of eternal
Self, that was neither body nor consciousness.  Many of these he had retained; others were submerged and
covered with dust.  Just as the potter's wheel, once set in motion, still turns for a long time and then turns
only very slowly and stops, so did the wheel of the ascetic, the wheel of thinking, the wheel of
discrimination still revolve for a long time in Siddhartha's soul; it still revolved, but slowly and hesitatingly,
and it had nearly come to a standstill.  Slowly, like moisture entering the dying tree trunk, slowly filling and
rotting it, so did the world and inertia86 creep into Siddhartha's soul; it slowly filled his soul made it heavy,
made it tired, sent it to sleep.  But on the other hand his senses became more awakened, they learned a great
deal, experienced a great deal.
Siddhartha had learned how to transact business affairs, to exercise power over people, to amuse himself
with women; he had learned to wear fine clothes, to command servants, to bathe in sweet-smelling waters.
He had learned to eat sweet and carefully prepared foods, also fish and meat and fowl, spices and dainties,
and to drink wine which made him lazy and forgetful.  He had learned to play dice and chess, to watch
dancers, to be carried in sedan chairs, to sleep on a soft bed.  But he had always felt different from and
superior to the others; he had always watched them a little scornfully, with a slightly mocking disdain, with
that disdain which a Samana always feels towards the people of the world.  If Kamaswami was upset, if he
felt that he had been insulted, or if he was troubled with his business affairs, Siddhartha had always regarded
him mockingly.  But slowly and imperceptibly, with the passing of the seasons, his mockery and feeling of
superiority diminished.  Gradually, along with his growing riches, Siddhartha himself acquired some of the
characteristics of the ordinary people, some of their childishness and some of their anxiety.  And yet he
envied them; the more he became like them, the more he envied them.  He envied them the one thing that he
lacked and that they had: the sense of importance with which they lived their lives, the depth of their
pleasures and sorrows, the anxious but sweet happiness of their continual power to love.  These people were
always in love with themselves, with their children, with honor or money, with plans or hope.  But these he
did not learn from them, these child-like pleasures and follies; he only learned the unpleasant things from
them which he despised.  It happened more frequently that after a merry evening, he lay late in bed the
following morning and felt dull and tired.  He would become annoyed and impatient when Kamaswami
bored him with his worries.  He would laugh too loudly when he lost at dice.  His face was still more clever
and intellectual than other people's, but he rarely laughed, and gradually his face assumed the expressions
which are so often found among rich people-the expressions of discontent, of sickliness, of displeasure, of
idleness, of lovelessness.  Slowly the soul sickness of the rich crept over him.
Like a veil, like a thin mist, a weariness settled on Siddhartha, slowly, every day a little thicker, every month
a little darker, every year a little heavier.  As a new dress grows old with time, loses its bright color,
becomes stained and creased, the hems frayed, and here and there weak and threadbare places, so had
Siddhartha's new life which he had begun after his parting from Govinda, become old.  In the same way it
lost its color and sheen with the passing of the years:  creases and stains accumulated, and hidden in the
depths, here and there already appearing, waited disillusionment and nausea.  Siddhartha did not notice it.
He only noticed that the bright and clear inward voice, that had once awakened in him and had always
guided him in his finest hours, had become silent.
The world had caught him; pleasure, covetousness,87 idleness, and finally also that vice that he had always
despised and scorned as the most foolish-acquisitiveness.  Property, possessions and riches had also finally
trapped him.  They were no longer a game and a toy; they had become a chain and a burden.  Siddhartha
wandered along a strange, twisted path of this last and most base declivity88 through the game of dice.  Since
the time he had stopped being a Samana in his heart, Siddhartha began to play dice for money and jewels
with increasing fervor, a game in which he had previously smilingly and indulgently taken part as a custom
of the ordinary people.  He was a formidable player; few dared play with him for his stakes were so high and
reckless.  He played the game as a re-suIt of a heartfelt need.  He derived a passionate pleasure through the
gambling away and squandering of wretched money.  In no other way could he show more clearly and
mockingly his contempt for riches, the false deity of businessmen.  So he staked high and unsparingly,
hating himself, mocking himself.  He won thousands, he threw thousands away, lost money, lost jewels, lost
a country house, won again, lost again.  He loved that anxiety, that terrible and oppressive anxiety which he
experienced during the game of dice, during the suspense of high stakes.  He loved this feeling and
continually sought to renew it, to increase it, to stimulate it, for in this feeling alone did he experience some
kind of happiness, some kind of excitement, some heightened living in the midst of his satiated, tepid,89
insipid existence.  And after every great loss he devoted himself to the procurement of new riches, went
eagerly after business and pressed his debtors for payment, for he wanted to play again, he wanted to
squander again, he wanted to show his contempt for riches again.  Siddhartha became impatient at losses, he
lost his patience with slow-paying debtors, he was no longer kindhearted to beggars, he no longer had the
desire to give gifts and loans to the poor.  He, who staked ten thousand on the throw of the dice and laughed,
became more hard and mean in business, and sometimes dreamt of money at night.  And whenever he
awakened from this hateful spell, when he saw his face reflected in the mirror on the wall of his bedroom,
grown older and uglier, whenever shame and nausea overtook him, he fled again, fled to a new game of
chance, fled in confusion to passion, to wine, and from there back again to the urge for acquiring and
hoarding wealth.  He wore himself out in this senseless cycle, became old and sick.
Then a dream once reminded him.  He had been with Kamala in the evening, in her lovely pleasure garden.
They sat under a tree talking.  Kamala was speaking seriously, and grief and weariness were concealed
behind her words.  She had asked him to tell her about Gotama, and could not hear enough about him, how
clear his eyes were, how peaceful and beautiful his mouth, how gracious his smile, how peaceful his entire
manner.  For a long time he had to talk to her about the Illustrious Buddha and Kamala had sighed and said:
"One day, perhaps soon, I will also become a follower of this Buddha.  I will give him my pleasure garden
and take refuge in his teachings." But then she enticed him, and in love play she clasped him to her with
extreme fervor, fiercely and tearfully, as if she wanted once more to extract the last sweet drop from this
fleeting pleasure.  Never had it been so strangely clear to Siddhartha how closely related passion was to
death.  Then he lay beside her and Kamala's face was near to his, and under her eyes and near the corners of
her mouth, he read clearly for the first time a sad sign-fine lines and wrinkles, a sign which gave a reminder
of autumn and old age.  Siddhartha himself, who was only in his forties, had noticed grey hairs here and
there in his black hair.  Weariness was written on Kamala's beautiful face weariness from continuing along a
long path which had no joyous goal, weariness and incipient old age, and concealed and not yet mentioned,
perhaps a not yet conscious fear-fear of the autumn of life, fear of old age, fear of death.  Sighing, he took
leave of her, his heart full of misery and secret fear.
Then Siddhartha had spent the night at his house with dancers and wine, had pretended to be superior to his
companions, which he no longer was.  He had drunk much wine and late after midnight he went to bed, tired
and yet agitated, nearly in tears and in despair.  In vain did he try to sleep.  His heart was so full of misery,
he felt he could no longer endure it.  He was full of a nausea which overpowered him like a distasteful wine,
or music that was too sweet and superficial, or like the too sweet smile of the dancers or the too sweet
perfume of their hair and breasts.  But above all he was nauseated with himself, with his perfumed hair, with
the smell of wine from his mouth, with the soft, flabby appearance of his skin.  Like one who has eaten and
drunk too much and vomits painfully and then feels better, so did the restless man wish he could rid himself
with one terrific heave of these pleasures, of these habits of this entirely senseless life.  Only at daybreak and
at the first signs of activity outside his town house, did he doze off and had a few moments of semi-oblivion,
a possibility of sleep.  During that time he had a dream.
Kamala kept a small rare songbird in a small golden cage.  It was about this bird that he dreamt.  This bird,
which usually sang in the morning, became mute, and as this surprised him, he went up to the cage and
looked inside.  The little bird was dead and lay stiff on the floor.  He took it out, held it a moment in his
hand and then threw it away on the road, and at the same moment he was horrified and his heart ached as if
he had thrown away with this dead bird all that was good and of value in himself.
Awakening from this dream, he was overwhelmed by a feeling of great sadness.  It seemed to him that he
had spent his life in a worthless and senseless manner; he retained nothing vital, nothing in any way precious
or worth while.  He stood alone, like a shipwrecked man on the shore.
Sadly, Siddhartha went to a pleasure garden that belonged to him, closed the gates, sat under a mango tree,
and felt horror and death in his heart.  He sat and felt himself dying, withering, finishing.  Gradually, he
collected his thoughts and mentally went through the whole of his life, from the earliest days which he could
remember.  When had he really been happy?  When had he really experienced joy?  Well, he had
experienced this several times.  He had tasted it in the days of his boyhood, when he had won praise from
the Brahmins, when he far outstripped his contemporaries, when he excelled himself at the recitation of the
holy verses, in argument with the learned men, when assisting at the sacrifices.  Then he had felt in his heart:
"A path lies before you which you are called to follow.  The gods await you." And again as a youth when his
continually soaring goal had propelled him in and out of the crowd of similar seekers when he had striven
hard to understand the Brahmins' teachings, when every freshly acquired knowledge only engendered a new
thirst, then again, in the midst of his thirst in, the midst of his efforts, he had thought: Onwards, onwards,
this is your path.  He had heard this voice when he had left his home and chosen the life of the Samanas, and
again when he had left the Samanas and gone to the Perfect One, and also when he had left him for the
unknown.  How long was it now since he had heard this voice since he had soared to any heights?  How flat
and desolate his path had been!  How many long years he had spent without any lofty goal, without any
thirst, without any exaltation,90 content with small pleasures and yet never really satisfied!  Without knowing
it, he had endeavored and longed all these years to be like all these other people, like these children, and yet
his life had been much more wretched and poorer than theirs, for their aims were not his, nor their sorrows
his.  This whole world of the Kamaswami people had only been a game to him, a dance, a comedy which
one watches.
Only Kamala was dear to him-had been of value to him-but was she still?  Did he, still need her-and did she
still need him?  Were they not playing a game without an end?  Was it necessary to live for it?  No.  This
game was called Samsara,91 a game for children, a game which was perhaps enjoyable played once, twice,
ten times-but was it worth playing continually?
Then Siddhartha knew that the game was finished, that he could play it no longer.  A shudder passed through
his body; he felt as if something had died.
He sat all that day under the mango tree, thinking of his father, thinking of Govinda, thinking of Gotama.
Had he left all these in order to become a Kamaswami?  He sat there till night fell.  When he looked up and
saw the stars, he thought: I am sitting here under my mango tree, in my pleasure garden.  He smiled a little.
Was it necessary, was it right, was it not a foolish thing that he should possess a mango tree and a garden?
He had finished with that.  That also died in him.  He rose, said farewell to the mango tree and the pleasure
garden.  As he had not had any food that day he felt extremely hungry, and thought of his house in the town,
of his room and bed, of the table with food.  He smiled wearily, shook his head and said good-bye to these
things.
The same night Siddhartha left his garden and the town and never returned.  For a long time Kamaswami
tried to find him, believing he had fallen into the hands of bandits.  Kamala did not try to find him.  She was
not surprised when she learned that Siddhartha had disappeared.  Had she not always expected it?  Was he
not a Samana, without a home, a pilgrim?  She had felt it more than ever at their last meeting, and in the
midst of her pain at her loss, she rejoiced that she had pressed him so close to her heart on that last occasion,
had felt so completely possessed and mastered by him.
When she heard the first news of Siddhartha's disappearance, she went to the window where she kept a rare
songbird in a golden cage.  She opened the door of the cage, took the bird out and let it fly away.  For a long
time she looked after the disappearing bird.  From that day she received no more visitors and kept her house
closed.  After a time, she found that she was with child as a result of her last meeting with Siddhartha.
By the River
Siddhartha wandered into the forest, already far from the town, and knew only one thing-that he could not
go back, that the life he had lived for many years was past, tasted and drained to a degree of nausea.  The
songbird was dead; its death, which he had dreamt about, was the bird in his own heart.  He was deeply
entangled in Samsara; he had drawn nausea and death to himself from all sides, like a sponge that absorbs
water until it is full.  He was full of ennui,92 full of misery, full of death; there was nothing left in the world
that could attract him, that could give him pleasure and solace.
He wished passionately for oblivion, to be at rest, to be dead.  If only a flash of lightning would strike him!
If only a tiger would come and eat him! If there were only some wine, some poison, that would give him
oblivion, that would make him forget, that would make him sleep and never awaken! Was there any kind of
filth with which he had not besmirched himself,93 any sin and folly which he had not committed, any stain
upon his soul for which he alone had not been responsible?  Was it then still possible to live?  Was it
possible to take in breath again and again, to breathe out, to feel hunger, to eat again, to sleep again, to lie
with women again?  Was this cycle not exhausted and finished for him?
Siddhartha reached the long river in the wood, the same river across which a ferryman had once taken him
when he was still a young man and had come from Gotama's town.  He stopped at this river and stood
hesitatingly on the bank.  Fatigue and hunger had weakened him.  Why should he go any further, where, and
for what purpose?  There was no more purpose; there was nothing more than a deep, painful longing to
shake off this whole confused dream, to spit out this stale wine, to make an end of this bitter, painful life.
There was a tree on the river bank, a cocoanut tree.  Siddhartha leaned against it, laced his arm around the
trunk and looked down into the green water which flowed beneath him.  He looked down and was
completely filled with a desire to let himself go and be submerged in the water.  A chilly emptiness in the
water reflected the terrible emptiness in his soul.  Yes, he was at the end.  There was nothing more for him
but to efface himself,94 to destroy the unsuccessful structure of his life, to throw it away, mocked at by the
gods.  That was the deed which he longed to commit, to destroy the form which he hated!  Might the fishes
devour him, this dog of a Siddhartha, this madman, this corrupted and rotting body, this sluggish and
misused soul!  Might the fishes and crocodiles devour him, might the demons tear him to little pieces!
With a distorted countenance he stared into the water.  He saw his face reflected, and spat at it; he took his
arm away from the tree trunk and turned a little, so that he could fall headlong and finally go under.  He
bent, with closed eyes - towards death.
Then from a remote part of his soul, from the past of his tired life, he heard a sound.  It was one word, one
syllable, which without thinking he spoke indistinctly, the ancient beginning and ending of all Brahmin
prayers, the holy Om, which had the meaning of "the Perfect One" or "Perfection." At that moment, when
the sound of Om reached Siddhartha's ears, his slumbering soul suddenly awakened and he recognized the
folly of his action.
Siddhartha was deeply horrified.  So that was what he had come to; he was so lost, so confused, so devoid of
all reason, that he had sought death.  This wish, this childish wish had grown so strong within him: to find
peace by destroying his body.  All the torment of these recent times, all the disillusionment, all the despair,
had not affected him so much as it did the moment the Om reached his consciousness and he recognized his
wretchedness and his crime.
"Om," he pronounced inwardly, and he was conscious of Brahman, of the indestructibleness of life; he
remembered all that he had forgotten, all that was divine.
But it was only for a moment, a flash.  Siddhartha sank down at the foot of the cocoanut tree, overcome by
fatigue.  Murmuring Om, he laid his head on the tree roots and sank into a deep sleep.
His sleep was deep and dreamless; he had not slept like that for a long time.  When he awakened after many
hours, it seemed to him as if ten years had passed.  He heard the soft rippling of the water; he did not know
where he was nor what had brought him there.  He looked up and was surprised to see the trees and the sky
above him.  He remembered where he was and how he came to be there.  He felt a desire to remain there for
a long time.  The past now seemed to him to be covered by a veil, extremely remote, very unimportant.  He
only knew that his previous life (at the first moment of his return to consciousness his previous life seemed
to him like a remote incarnation, like an earlier birth of his present Self) was finished, that it was so full of
nausea and wretchedness that he had wanted to destroy it, but that he had come to himself by a river, under a
cocoanut tree, with the holy word Om on his lips.  Then he had fallen asleep, and on awakening he looked at
the world like a new man.  Softly he said the word Om to himself, over which he had fallen asleep, and it
seemed to him as if his whole sleep had been a long deep pronouncing of Om, thinking of Om, an
immersion and penetration into Om, into the nameless, into the Divine.
What a wonderful sleep it had been!  Never had a sleep so refreshed him, so renewed him, so rejuvenated
him! Perhaps he had really died, perhaps he had been drowned and was reborn in another form.  No, he
recognized himself, he recognized his hands and feet, the place where he lay and the Self in his breast,
Siddhartha, self-willed, individualistic.  But this Siddhartha was somewhat changed, renewed.  He had slept
wonderfully.  He was remarkably awake, happy and curious.
Siddhartha raised himself and saw a monk in a yellow gown, with shaved head, sitting opposite him in the
attitude of a thinker.  He looked at the man, who had neither hair on his head nor a beard, and he did not
look at him long when he recognized in this monk, Govinda, the friend
of his youth, Govinda who had taken refuge in the Illustrious Buddha.  Govinda had also aged, but he still
showed the old characteristics in his face-eagerness, loyalty, curiosity, anxiety.  But when Govinda, feeling
his glance, raised his eyes and looked at him, Siddhartha saw that Govinda did not recognize him.  Govinda
was pleased to find him awake.  Apparently he had sat there a long time waiting for him to awaken, although
he did not know him.
"I was sleeping," said Siddhartha.  "How did you come here?"
"You were sleeping," answered Govinda, "and it is not good to sleep in such places where there are often
snakes and animals from the forest prowling about.  I am one of the followers of the Illustrious Gotama, the
Buddha of Sakyamuni, and I am on a pilgrimage with a number of our order.  I saw you lying asleep in a
dangerous place, so I tried to awaken you, and then as I saw you were sleeping very deeply, I remained
behind my brothers and sat by you.  Then it seems that I, who wanted to watch over you, fell asleep myself.
Weariness overcame me and I kept my watch badly.  But now you are awake, so-I must go and overtake my
brothers."
"I thank you, Samana, for guarding my sleep.  The followers of the Illustrious One are very kind, but now
you may go on your way."
"I am going.  May you keep well."
"I thank you, Samana."
Govinda bowed and said, "Good-bye."
"Good-bye, Govinda," said Siddhartha.
The monk stood still.
"Excuse me, sir, how do you know my name?"
Thereupon Siddhartha laughed.
"I know you, Govinda, from your father's house and from the Brahmins' school, and from the sacrifices, and
from our sojourn with the Samanas and from that hour in the grove of Jetavana when you swore allegiance
to the Illustrious One."
"You are Siddhartha," cried Govinda aloud.  "Now I recognize you and do not understand why I did not
recognize you immediately.  Greetings, Siddhartha, it gives me great pleasure to see you again."
"I am also pleased to see you again.  You have watched over me during my sleep.  I thank you once again,
although I needed no guard.  Where are you going, my friend?"
"I am not going anywhere.  We monks are always on the way, except during the rainy season.  We always
move from place to place, live according to the rule, preach the gospel, collect aIms and then move on.  It is
always the same.  But where are you going, Siddhartha?"
Siddhartha said: "It is the same with me as it is with you, my friend.  I am not going anywhere.  I am only on
the way.  I am making a pilgrimage."
Govinda said: "You say you are making a pilgrimage and I believe you.  But forgive me, Siddhartha, you do
not look like a pilgrim.  You are wearing the clothes of a rich man, you are wearing the shoes of a man of
fashion, and your perfumed hair is not the hair of a pilgrim, it is not the hair of a Samana."
"You have observed well, my friend; you see everything with your sharp eyes.  But I did not tell you that I
am a Samana.  I said I was making a pilgrimage and that is true."
"You are making a pilgrimage, said Govinda, but few make a pilgrimage in such clothes, in such shoes and
with such hair.  I, who have been wandering for many years, have never seen such a pilgrim."
I believe you, Govinda.  But today you have met such a pilgrim in such shoes and, dress.  Remember, my
dear Govinda, the world of appearances is transitory,95 the style of our clothes and hair is extremely
transitory.  Our hair and our bodies are themselves transitory.  You have observed correctly.  I am wearing
the clothes of a rich man.  I am wearing them because I have been a rich man, and I am wearing my hair like
men of the world and fashion because I have been one of them."
"And what are you now, Siddhartha?"
"I do not know; I know as little as you.  I am on the way.  I was a rich man, but I am no longer and what I
will be tomorrow I do not know."
"Have you lost your riches?"
"I have lost them, or they have lost me-I am not sure.  The wheel of appearances revolves quickly, Govinda.
Where is Siddhartha the Brahmin, where is Siddhartha the Samana, where is Siddhartha the rich man?  The
transitory soon changes, Govinda.  You know that."
For a long time Govinda looked doubtfully at the friend of his youth.  Then he bowed to him, as one does to
a man of rank, and went on his way.
Smiling, Siddhartha watched him go.  He still loved him, this faithful anxious friend.  And at that moment,
in that splendid hour, after his wonderful sleep, permeated with Om, how could he help but love someone
and something.  That was just the magic that had happened to him during his sleep and the Om in him-he
loved everything, he was full of joyous love towards everything that he saw.  And it seemed to him that was
just why he was previously so ill-because he could love nothing and nobody.
With a smile Siddhartha watched the departing monk.  His sleep had strengthened him, but he suffered great
hunger for he had not eaten for two days, and the time
was long past when he could ward off hunger.  Troubled, yet also with laughter, he recalled that time.  He
remembered that at that time he had boasted of three things to Kamala, three noble and invincible arts:
fasting, waiting and thinking.  These were his possessions, his power and strength, his firm staff.  He had
learned these three arts and nothing else during the diligent, assiduous years of his youth.  Now he had lost
them, he possessed none of them any more, neither fasting, nor waiting, nor thinking.  He had exchanged
them for the most wretched things, for the transitory, for the pleasures of the senses, for high living and
riches.  He had gone along a strange path.  And now, it seemed that he had indeed become an ordinary
person.
Siddhartha reflected on his state.  He found it difficult to think; he really had no desire to, but he forced
himself.
Now, he thought, that all these transitory things have slipped away from me again, I stand once more
beneath the sun, as I once stood as a small child.  Nothing is mine, I know nothing, I possess nothing, I have
learned nothing.  How strange it is! Now, when I am no longer young, when my hair is fast growing gray,
when strength begins to diminish, now I am beginning again like a child.  He had to smile again.  Yes, his
destiny was strange! He was going backwards, and now he again stood empty and naked and ignorant in the
world.  But he did not grieve about it; no, he even felt a great desire to laugh, to laugh at himself, to laugh at
this strange foolish world!
Things are going backwards with you, he said to himself and laughed, and as he said it, his glance lighted on
the river, and he saw the river also flowing continually backwards, singing merrily.  That pleased him
immensely; he smiled cheerfully at the river.  Was this not the river in which he had once wished to drown
himself-hundreds of years ago-or had he dreamt it?
How strange his life had been, he thought.  He had wandered along strange paths.  As a boy I was occupied
with the gods and sacrifices, as a youth with asceticism, with thinking and meditation.  I was in search of
Brahman and revered the eternal in Atman.  As a young man I was attracted to expiation.  I lived in the
woods, suffered heat and cold.  I learned to fast, I learned to conquer my body.  I then discovered with
wonder the teachings of the great Buddha.  I felt knowledge and the unity of the world circulate in me like
my own blood, but I also felt compelled to leave the Buddha and the great knowledge.  I went and learned
the pleasures of love from Kamala and business from Kamaswami.  I hoarded money, I squandered money, I
acquired a taste for rich food, I learned to stimulate my senses.  I had to spend many years like that in order
to lose my intelligence, to lose the power to think, to forget about the unity of things.  Is it not true, that
slowly and through many deviations I changed from a man into a child?  From a thinker into an ordinary
person?  And yet this path has been good and the bird in my breast has not died.  But what a path it has
been! I have had to experience so much stupidity, so many vices, so much error, so much nausea,
disillusionment and sorrow, just in order to become a child again and begin anew.  But it was right that it
should be so; my eyes and heart acclaim it.  I had to experience despair, I had to sink to the greatest mental
depths, to thoughts of suicide, in order to experience grace, to hear Om again, to sleep deeply again and to
awaken refreshed again.  I had to become a fool again in order to find Atman in myself.  I had to sin in order
to live again.  Whither will my path yet lead me?  This path is stupid, it goes in spirals, perhaps in circles,
but whichever way it goes, I will follow it.
He was aware of a great happiness mounting within him.
Where does it come from, he asked himself?  What is the reason for this feeling of happiness?  Does it arise
from my good long sleep which has done me so much good?  Or from the word Om which I pronounced?
Or because I have run away, because my flight is accomplished, because I am at last free again and stand
like a child beneath the sky?  Ah, how good this flight has been, this liberation! In the place from which I
escaped there was always an atmosphere of pomade, spice, excess and inertia.  How I hated that world of
riches, carousing and playing! How I hated myself for remaining so long in that horrible world! How I hated
myself, thwarted,96 poisoned and tortured myself, made myself old and ugly.  Never again, as I once fondly
imagined, will I consider that Siddhartha is clever.  But one thing I have done well, which pleases me, which
I must praise-I have now put an end to that self-detestation, to that foolish empty life.  I commend you,
Siddhartha, that after so many years of folly, you have again had a good idea, that you have accomplished
something, that you have again heard the bird in your breast sing and followed it.
So he praised himself, was pleased with himself and listened curiously to his stomach which rumbled from
hunger.  He felt he had thoroughly tasted and ejected a portion of sorrow, a portion of misery during those
past times, that he had consumed them up to a point of despair and death.  But all was well.  He could have
remained much longer with Kamaswami, made and squandered money, fed his body and neglected his soul;
he could have dwelt for a long time yet in that soft, well-upholstered hell, if this had not happened, this
moment of complete hopelessness and despair and the tense moment when he had bent over the flowing
water, ready to commit suicide.  This despair, this extreme nausea which he had experienced had not
overpowered him.  The bird, the clear spring and voice within him was still alive-that was why he rejoiced,
that was why he laughed, that was why his face was radiant under his gray hair.
It is a good thing to experience everything oneself, he thought.  As a child I learned that pleasures of the
world and riches were not good.  I have known it for a long time, but I have only just experienced it.  Now I
know it not only with my intellect, but with my eyes, with my heart, with my stomach.  It is a good thing
that I know this.
He thought long of the change in him, listened to the bird singing happily.  If this bird within him had died,
would he have perished?  No, something else in him had died, something that he had long desired should
perish.  Was it not what he had once wished to destroy during his ardent years of asceticism?  Was it not his
Self, his small, fearful and proud Self, with which he had wrestled for so many years, but which had always
conquered him again, which appeared each time again and again, which robbed him of happiness and filled
him with fear?  Was it not this which had finally died today in the wood by this delightful river?  Was it not
because of its death that he was now like a child, so full of trust and happiness, without fear?
Siddhartha now also realized why he had struggled in vain with this Self when he was a Brahmin and an
ascetic.  Too much knowledge had hindered him; too many holy verses, too many sacrificial rites, too much
mortification of the flesh, too much doing and striving.  He had been full of arrogance; he had always been
the cleverest, the most eager-always a step ahead of the others, always the learned and intellectual one,
always the priest or the sage.  His Self had crawled into this priesthood, into this arrogance, into this
intellectuality.  It sat there tightly and grew, while he thought he was destroying it by fasting and penitence.
Now he understood it and realized that the inward voice had been right, that no teacher could have brought
him salvation.  That was why he had to go into the world, to lose himself in power, women and money; that
was why he had to be a merchant, a dice player, a drinker and a man of property, until the priest and Samana
in him were dead.  That was why he had to undergo those horrible years, suffer nausea, learn the lesson of
the madness of an empty, futile life till the end, till he reached bitter despair, so that Siddhartha the pleasure-
monger and Siddhartha the man of property could die.  He had died and a new Siddhartha had awakened
from his sleep.  He also would grow old and die.  Siddhartha was transitory, all forms were transitory, but
today he was young, he was a child-the new Siddhartha-and he was very happy.
These thoughts passed through his mind.  Smiling, he listened to his stomach, listened thankfully to a
humming bee.  Happily he looked into the flowing river.  Never had Ia river attracted him as much as this
one.  Never had he found the voice and appearance of flowing water so beautiful.  It seemed to him as if the
river had something special to tell him, something which he did not know, something which still awaited
him.  Siddhartha had wanted to drown himself in this river; the old, tired, despairing Siddhartha was today
drowned in it.  The new Siddhartha felt a deep love for this flowing water and decided that he would not
leave it again so quickly.
The Ferryman
I will remain by this river, thought Siddhartha.  It is the same river which I crossed on my way to the town.
A friendly ferryman took me across.  I will go to him.  My path once led from his hut to a new life which is
now old and dead.  May my present path, my new life, start from there!
He looked lovingly into the flowing water, into the transparent green, into the crystal lines of its wonderful
design.  He saw bright pearls rise from the depths, bubbles swimming on the mirror, sky blue reflected in
them.  The river looked at him with a thousand eyes - green, white, crystal, sky blue.  How he loved this
river, how it enchanted him, how grateful he was to it! In his heart he heard the newly awakened voice
speak, and it said to him:  "Love this river, stay by it, learn from it." Yes, he wanted to learn from it, he
wanted to listen to it.  It seemed to him that whoever understood this river and its secrets, would understand
much more, many secrets, all secrets.
But today he only saw one of the river's secrets, one that gripped his soul.  He saw that the water continually
flowed and flowed and yet it was always there; it was always the same and yet every moment it was new.
Who could understand, conceive this?  He did not understand it; he was only aware of a dim suspicion, a
faint memory, divine voices.
Siddhartha rose; the pangs of hunger were becoming unbearable.  He wandered painfully along the river
bank, listened to the rippling of the water, listened to the gnawing hunger in his body.
When he reached the ferry, the boat was already there and the ferryman who had once taken the young
Samana across, stood in the boat.  Siddhartha recognized him.  He had also aged very much.
"Will you take me across?" he asked.
The ferryman, astonished to see such a distinguished-looking man alone and on foot, took him into the boat
and set off.
"You have chosen a splendid life," said Siddhartha.  "It must be fine to live near this river and sail on it
every day."
The rower smiled, swaying gently.
"It is fine, sir, as you say, but is not every life, every work fine?"
"Maybe, but I envy you yours."
"Oh, you would soon lose your taste for it.  It is not for people in fine clothes."
Siddhartha laughed.  "I have already been judged by my clothes today and regarded with suspicion.  Will
you accept these clothes from me, which I find a nuisance?  For I must tell you that I have no money to pay
you for taking me across the river."
"The gentleman is joking," laughed the ferryman.
"I am not joking, my friend.  You once previously took me across this river without payment, so please do it
today also and take my clothes instead."
"And will the gentleman continue without clothes?"
"I should prefer not to go further.  I should prefer it if you would give me some old clothes and keep me here
as your assistant, or rather your apprentice, for I must learn how to handle the boat."
The ferryman looked keenly at the stranger for a long time.
"I recognize you," he said finally.  "You once slept in my hut.  It is a long time ago, maybe more than twenty
years ago.  I took you across the river and we parted good friends.  Were you not a Samana?  I cannot
remember your name."
"My name is Siddhartha and I was a Samana when you last saw me."
"You are welcome, Siddhartha.  My name is Vasudeva.97  I hope you will be my guest today and also sleep
in my hut, and tell me where you have come from and why you are so tired of your fine clothes."
They had reached the middle of the river and Vasudeva rowed more strongly because of the current.  He
rowed calmly, with strong arms, watching the end of the boat.  Siddhartha sat and watched him and
remembered how once, in those last Samana days, he had felt affection for this man.  He gratefully accepted
Vasudeva's invitation.
When they reached the river bank, he helped him to secure the boat.  Then Vasudeva led him into the hut,
offered him bread and water, which Siddhartha ate with enjoyment, as well as the mango fruit which
Vasudeva offered him.
Later, when the sun was beginning to set, they sat on a tree trunk by the river and Siddhartha told him about
his origin and his life and how he had seen him today after that hour of despair.  The story lasted late into the
night.
Vasudeva listened with great attention; he heard all about his origin and childhood, about his studies, his
seekings, his pleasures and needs.  It was one of the ferryman's greatest virtues that, like few people, he
knew how to listen.  Without his saying a word, the speaker felt that Vasudeva took in every word, quietly,
expectantly, that he missed nothing.  He did not await anything with impatience and gave neither praise nor
blame-he only listened.  Siddhartha felt how wonderful it was to have such a listener who could be absorbed
in another person's life, his strivings, his sorrows.
However, towards the end of Siddhartha's story, when he told him about the tree by the river and his deep
despair, about the holy Om, and how after his sleep he felt such a love for the river, the ferryman listened
with doubled attention, completely absorbed, his eyes closed.
When Siddhartha had finished and there was a long pause, Vasudeva said: "It is as I thought; the river has
spoken to you.  It is friendly towards you, too; it speaks to you.  That is good, very good.  Stay with me,
Siddhartha, my friend.  I once had a wife, her bed was at the side of mine, but she died long ago.  I have
lived alone for a long time.  Come and live with me; there is room and food for both of us."
"I thank you," said Siddhartha, "I thank you and accept.  I also thank you, Vasudeva, for listening so well.
There are few people who know how to listen and I have not met anybody who can do so like you.  I will
also learn from you in this respect."
"You will learn it," said Vasudeva, "but not from me.  The river has taught me to listen; you will learn from
it, too.  The river knows everything; one can learn everything from it.  You have already learned from the
river that it is good to strive downwards, to sink, to seek the depths.  The rich and distinguished Siddhartha
will become a rower; Siddhartha the learned Brahmin will become a ferryman.  You have also learned this
from the river.  You will learn the other thing, too."
After a long pause, Siddhartha said: "What other thing, Vasudeva?"
Vasudeva rose.  "It has grown late," he said, "let us go to bed.  I cannot tell you what the other thing is, my
friend.  You will find out, perhaps you already know.  I am not a learned man; I do not know how to talk or
think.  I only know how to listen and be devout; otherwise I have learned nothing.  If I could talk and teach,
I would perhaps be a teacher, but as it is I am only a ferryman and it is my task to take people across this
river.  I have taken thousands of people across and to all of them my river has been nothing but a hindrance
on their journey.  They have travelled for money and business, to weddings and on pilgrimages; the river has
been in their way and the ferryman was there to take them quickly across the obstacle.  However, amongst
the thousands there have been a few, four or five, to whom the river was not an obstacle.  They have heard
its voice and listened to it, and the river has become holy to them, as it has to me.  Let us now go to bed,
Siddhartha."
Siddhartha stayed with the ferryman and learned how to look after the boat, and when there was nothing to
do at the ferry, he worked in the rice field with Vasudeva, gathered wood, and picked fruit from the banana
trees.  He learned how to make oars, how to improve the boat and to make baskets.  He was pleased with
everything that he did and learned and the days and months passed quickly.  But he learned more from the
river than Vasudeva could teach him.  He learned from it continually.  Above all, he learned from it how to
listen, to listen with a still heart, with a waiting, open soul, without passion, without desire, without
judgment, without opinions.
He lived happily with Vasudeva and occasionally they exchanged words, few and long-considered words.
Vasudeva was no friend of words.  Siddhartha was rarely successful in moving him to speak.
He once asked him, "Have you also learned that secret from the river; that there no such thing as time?  A
bright smile spread over Vasudeva's face.
"Yes, Siddhartha," he said.  "Is this what you mean?  That the river is everywhere at the same time, at the
source and at the mouth, at the waterfall, at the ferry, at the current, in the ocean and in the mountains,
everywhere, and that the present only exists for it, not the shadow of the past, nor the shadow of the future?"
"That is it," said Siddhartha, "and when I learned that, I reviewed my life and it was also a river, and
Siddhartha the boy, Siddhartha the mature man and Siddhartha the old man, were only separated by
shadows, not through reality.  Siddhartha's previous lives were also not in the past, and his death and his
return to Brahma are not in the future.  Nothing was, nothing will be, everything has reality and presence."
Siddhartha spoke with delight.  This discovery had made him very happy.  Was then not all sorrow in time,
all self-torment and fear in time?  Were not all difficulties and evil in the world conquered as soon as one
conquered time, as soon as one dispelled time?  He had spoken with delight, but Vasudeva just smiled
radiantly at him and nodded his agreement.  He stroked Siddhartha's shoulder and returned to his work.
And once again when the river swelled during the rainy season and roared loudly, Siddhartha said: "Is it not
true, my friend, that the river has very many voices?  Has it not the voice of a king, of a warrior, of a bull, of
a night bird, of a pregnant woman and a sighing man, and a thousand other voices?"
"It is so," nodded Vasudeva, "the voices of all living creatures are in its voice."
"And do you know," continued Siddhartha, "what word it pronounces when one is successful in hearing all
its ten thousand voices at the same time?"
Vasudeva laughed joyously; he bent towards Siddhartha and whispered the holy Om in his ear.  And this
was just what Siddhartha had heard.
As time went on his smile began to resemble the ferryman's, was almost equally radiant, almost equally full
of happiness, equally lighting up through a thousand little wrinkles, equally childish, equally senile.  Many
travellers, when seeing both ferrymen together, took them for brothers.  Often they sat together in the
evening on the tree trunk by the river.  They both listened silently to the water, which to them was not just
water, but the voice of life, the voice of Being, of perpetual Becoming.  And it sometimes happened that
while listening to the river, they both thought the same thoughts, perhaps of a conversation of the previous
day, or about one of the travellers whose fate and circumstances occupied their minds, or death, or their
childhood; and when the river told them something good at the same moment, they looked at each other,
both thinking the same thought, both happy at the same answer to the same question.
Something emanated from the ferry and from both ferrymen that many of the travellers felt.  It sometimes
happened that a traveller, after looking at the face of one of the ferrymen, began to talk about his life and
troubles, confessed sins, asked for comfort and advice.  It sometimes happened that someone would ask
permission to spend an evening with them in order to listen to the river.  It also happened that curious people
came along, who had been told that two wise men, magicians or holy men lived at the ferry.  The curious
ones asked many questions but they received no replies, and they found neither magicians nor wise men.
They only found two friendly old men, who appeared to be mute, rather odd and stupid.  And the curious
ones laughed and said how foolish and credible people were to spread such wild rumors.
The years passed and nobody counted them.  Then one day, some monks came along, followers of Gotama,
the Buddha, and asked to be taken across the river.  The ferrymen learned from them that they were
returning to their great teacher as quickly as possible, for the news had spread that the Illustrious One was
seriously ill and would soon suffer his last mortal death and attain salvation.  Not long afterwards another
party of monks arrived and then another, and the monks as well as most of the other travellers talked of
nothing but Gotama and his approaching death.  And as people come from all sides to a military expedition
or to the crowning of a king, so did they gather together like swarms of bees, drawn together by a magnet, to
go where the great Buddha was lying on his deathbed, where this great event was taking place and where the
savior of an age was passing into eternity.
Siddhartha thought a great deal at this time about the dying sage whose voice had stirred thousands, whose
voice he had also once heard, whose holy countenance he had also once looked at with awe.  He thought
lovingly of him, remembered his path to salvation, and smiling, remembered the words he had once uttered
as a young man to the Illustrious One.  It seemed to him that they had been arrogant and precocious words.
For a long time he knew that he was not separated from Gotama, although he could not accept his teachings.
No, a true seeker could not accept any teachings, not if he sincerely wished to find something.  But he who
had found, could give his approval to every path, every goal; nothing separated him from all the other
thousands who lived in eternity, who breathed the Divine.
One day, when very many people were making a pilgrimage to the dying Buddha, Kamala, once the most
beautiful of courtesans, was also on her way.  She had long retired from her previous way of life, had
presented her garden to Gotama's monks, taking refuge in his teachings, and belonged to the women and
benefactresses attached to the pilgrims.  On hearing of Gotama's approaching death, she had set off on foot,
wearing simple clothes, together with her son.  They had reached the river on her way, but the boy soon
became tired; he wanted to go home, he wanted to rest, he wanted to eat.  He was often sulky and tearful.
Kamala frequently had to rest with him.  He was used to matching his will against hers.  She had to feed
him, comfort him, and scold him.  He could not understand why his mother had to make this weary,
miserable pilgrimage to an unknown place, to a strange man who was holy and was dying.  Let him die-what
did it matter to the boy?
The pilgrims were not far from Vasudeva's ferry, when little Siddhartha told his mother he wanted to rest.
Kamala herself was tired, and while the boy ate a banana, she crouched down on the ground, half-closed her
eyes and rested.  Suddenly, however, she uttered a cry of pain.  The boy, startled, looked at her and saw her
face white with horror.  From under her clothes a small black snake, which had bitten Kamala, crawled
away.
They both ran on quickly in order to reach some people.  When they were near the ferry, Kamala collapsed
and could not go any further.  The boy cried out for help, meantime kissing and embracing his mother.  She
also joined in his loud cries, until the sounds reached Vasudeva, who was standing by the ferry.  He came
quickly, took the woman in his arms and carried her to the boat.  The boy joined him and they soon arrived
at the hut, where Siddhartha was standing and was just lighting the fire.  He looked up and first saw the boy's
face, which strangely Reminded him of something.  Then he saw Kamala, whom he recognized
immediately, although she lay unconscious in the ferryman's arms.  Then he knew that it was his own son
whose face had so reminded him of something, and his heart beat quickly.
Kamala's wound was washed, but it was already black and her body had swelled.  She was given a
restorative and her consciousness returned.  She was lying on Siddhartha's bed in his hut and Siddhartha,
whom she had once loved so much, was bending over her.  She thought she was dreaming, and smiling, she
looked into her lover's face.
Gradually, she realized her condition, remembered the bite and called anxiously for her son.
"Do not worry," said Siddhartha, "he is here."
Kamala looked into his eyes.  She found it difficult to speak with the poison in her system.  "You have
grown old, my dear," she said, "you have become gray, but you are like the young Samana who once came
to me in my garden, without clothes and with dusty feet.  You are much more like him than when you left
Kamaswami and me.  Your eyes are like his, Siddhartha.  Ah, I have also grown old, old-did you recognize
me?"
Siddhartha smiled.  "I recognized you immediately, Kamala, my dear."
Kamala indicated her son and said: "Did you recognize him, too?  He is your son."
Her eyes wandered and closed.  The boy began to cry.  Siddhartha put him on his knee, let him weep and
stroked his hair.  Looking at the child's face, he remembered a Brahmin prayer which he had once learned
when he himself was a small child.  Slowly and in a singing voice he began to recite it; the words came back
to him out of the past and his childhood.  The child became quiet as he recited, still sobbed a little and then
fell asleep.  Siddhartha put him on Vasudeva's bed.  Vasudeva stood by the hearth cooking rice.  Siddhartha
looked at Vasudeva and smiled at him.
"She is dying," said Siddhartha softly.
Vasudeva nodded.  The firelight from the hearth was reflected in his kind face.
Kamala again regained consciousness.  There was pain in her face; Siddhartha read the pain on her mouth, in
her pallid face.  He read it quietly, attentively, waiting, sharing her pain.  Kamala was aware of this; her
glance sought his.
Looking at him she said: "Now I see that your eyes have also changed.  They have become quite different.
How do I recognize that you are still Siddhartha?  You are Siddhartha and yet you are not like him."
Siddhartha did not speak; silently he looked into her eyes.
"Have you attained it?" she asked.  "Have you found peace?"
He smiled and placed his hand on hers.
"Yes," she said, "I see it.  I also will find peace."
"You have found it," whispered Siddhartha.
Kamala looked at him steadily.  It had been her intention to make a pilgrimage to Gotama, to see the face of
the Illustrious One, to obtain some of his peace, and instead she had only found Siddhartha, and it was good,
just as good as if she had seen the other.  She wanted to tell him that, but her tongue no longer obeyed her
will.  Silently she looked at him and he saw the life fade from her eyes.  When the last pain had filled and
passed from her eyes, when the last shudder had passed through her body, his fingers closed her eyelids.
He sat there a long time looking at her dead face.  For a long time he looked at her mouth, her old tired
mouth and her shrunken lips, and remembered how once, in the spring of his life, he had compared her lips
with a freshly cut fig.  For a long time he looked intently at the pale face, at the tired wrinkles and saw his
own face like that, just as white, also dead, and at the same time he saw his face and hers, young, with red
lips, with ardent eyes and he was overwhelmed with a feeling of the present and contemporary existence.  In
this hour he felt more acutely the indestructibleness of every life, the eternity of every moment.
When he rose, Vasudeva had prepared some rice for him but Siddhartha did not eat.  In the stable, where the
goat was, the two old men straightened some straw and Vasudeva lay down.  But Siddhartha went outside
and sat in front of the hut all night, listening to the river, sunk in the past, simultaneously affected and
encompassed by all the periods of his life.  From time to time, however, he rose, walked to the door of the
hut and listened to hear if the boy were sleeping.
Early in the morning, before the sun was yet visible, Vasudeva came out of the stable and walked up to his
friend.
"You have not slept," he said.
"No, Vasudeva, I sat here and listened to the river.  It has told me a great deal, it has filled me with many
great thoughts, with thoughts of unity."
"You have suffered, Siddhartha, yet I see that sadness has not entered your heart."
"No, my dear friend.  Why should I be sad?  I who was rich and happy have become still richer and happier.
My son has been given to me."
"I also welcome your son.  But now, Siddhartha, let us go to work, there is much to be done.  Kamala died
on the same bed where my wife died.  We shall also build Kamala's funeral pyre98 on the same hill where I
once built my wife's funeral pyre."
While the boy still slept, they built the funeral pyre.
The Son
Frightened and weeping, the boy had attended his mother's burial; frightened and gloomy he had listened to
Siddhartha greeting him as his son and making him welcome in Vasudeva's hut.  For days on end he sat with
a pale face on the hill of the dead, looked away, locked his heart, fought and strove against his fate.
Siddhartha treated him with consideration and left him alone, for he respected his grief.  Siddhartha
understood that his son did not know him, that he could not love him as a father.  Slowly, he also saw and
realized that the eleven-year-old child was a spoilt mother's boy and had been brought up in the habits of the
rich, that he was accustomed to fine food and a soft bed, accustomed to commanding servants.  Siddhartha
understood that the spoilt and grieving boy could not suddenly be content in a strange and poor place.  He
did not press him; he did a great deal for him and always saved the best morsels for him.  Slowly, by
friendly patience, he hoped to win him over.
He had considered himself rich and happy when the boy had come to him, but as time passed and the boy
remained unfriendly and sulky, when he proved arrogant and defiant, when he would do no work, when he
showed no respect to the old people and robbed Vasudeva's fruit trees, Siddhartha began to realize that no
happiness and peace had come to him with his son, only sorrow and trouble.  But he loved him and preferred
the sorrow and trouble of his love rather than happiness and pleasure without the boy.
Since young Siddhartha was in the hut, the old men had shared the work.  Vasudeva had taken over all the
work at the ferry and Siddhartha, in order to be with his son, the work in the hut and the fields.
For many months Siddhartha waited patiently in the hope that his son would come to understand him, that he
would accept his love and that he would perhaps return it.  For many months Vasudeva observed this, waited
and was silent.  One day, when young Siddhartha was distressing his father with his defiance and temper and
had broken both rice bowls, Vasudeva took his friend aside in the evening and talked to him.
"Forgive me," he said, "I am speaking to you as my friend.  I can see that you are worried and unhappy.
Your son, my dear friend, is troubling you, and also me.  The young bird is accustomed to a different life, to
a different nest.  He did not run away from riches and the town with a feeling of nausea and disgust as you
did; he has had to leave all these things against his will.  I have asked the river, my friend, I have asked it
many times, and the river laughed, it laughed at me and it laughed at you; it shook itself with laughter at our
folly.  Water will go to water, youth to youth.  Your son will not be happy in this place.  You ask the river
and listen to what it says."
Troubled, Siddhartha looked at the kind face, in which there were many good-natured wrinkles.
"How can I part from him?  he said softly.  Give me time yet, my dear friend.  I am fighting for him, I am
trying to reach his heart.  I will win him with love and patience.  The river will also talk to him some day.
He is also called."
Vasudeva's smile became warmer.  Oh yes, he said, "he is also called; he also belongs to the everlasting life.
But do you and I know to what he is called, to which path, which deeds, which sorrows?  His sorrows will
not be slight.  His heart is proud and hard.  He will probably suffer much, make many mistakes, do much
injustice and commit many sins.  Tell me, my friend, are you educating your son?  Is he obedient to you?
Do you strike him or punish him?
"No, Vasudeva, I do not do any of these things."
"I knew it.  You are not strict with him, you do not punish him, you do not command him-because you know
that gentleness is stronger than severity, that water is stronger than rock, that love is stronger than force.
Very good, I praise you.  But is it not perhaps a mistake on your part not to be strict with him, not to punish
him?  Do you not chain him with your love?  Do you not shame him daily with your goodness and patience
and make it still more difficult for him?  Do you not compel this arrogant, spoilt boy to live in a hut with two
old banana eaters, to whom even rice is a dainty, whose thoughts cannot be the same as his, whose hearts are
old and quiet and beat differently from his?  Is he not constrained and punished by all this?
Siddhartha looked at the ground in perplexity.  "What do you think I should do?" he asked softly.
Vasudeva said: "Take him into the town; take him to his mother's house.  There will still be servants there;
take him to them.  And if they are no longer there, take him to a teacher, not just for the sake of education,
but so that he can meet other boys and girls and be in the world to which he belongs.  Have you never
thought about it?"
"You can see into my heart," said Siddhartha sadly.  "I have often thought about it.  But how will he, who is
so hard-hearted, go on in this world?  Will he not consider himself superior, will he not lose himself in
pleasure and power, will he not repeat all his father's mistakes, will he not perhaps be quite lost in Samsara?"
The ferryman smiled again.  He touched Siddhartha's arm gently and said: "Ask the river about it, my friend!
Listen to it, laugh about it! Do you then really think that you have committed your follies in order to spare
your son them?  Can you then protect your son from Samsara?  How?  Through instruction, through prayers,
through exhortation?99  My dear friend, have you forgotten that instructive story about Siddhartha, the
Brahmin's son, which you once told me here?  Who protected Siddhartha the Samana from Samsara, from
sin, greed and folly?  Could his father's piety, his teacher's exhortations, his own knowledge, his own
seeking, protect him?  Which father, which teacher, could prevent him from living his own life, from soiling
himself with life, from loading himself with sin, from swallowing the bitter drink himself, from finding his
own path?  Do you think, my dear friend, that anybody is spared this path?  Perhaps your little son, because
you would like to see him spared sorrow and pain and disillusionment?  But if you were to die ten times for
him, you would not alter his destiny in the slightest."
Never had Vasudeva talked so much.  Siddhartha thanked him in a friendly fashion, went troubled to his hut,
but could not sleep.  Vasudeva had not told him anything that he had not already thought and known
himself.  But stronger than his knowledge was his love for the boy, his devotion, his fear of losing him.  Had
he ever lost his heart to anybody so completely, had he ever loved anybody so much, so blindly, so
painfully, so hopelessly and yet so happily?
Siddhartha could not take his friend's advice; he could not give up his son.  He allowed the boy to command
him, to be disrespectful to him.  He was silent and waited; he began daily the mute battle of friendliness and
patience.  Vasudeva was also silent and waited, friendly, understanding, forbearing.  They were both masters
of patience.
Once, when the boy's face reminded him of Kamala, Siddhartha suddenly remembered something she had
once said to him a long time ago.  "You cannot love," she had said to him and he had agreed with her.  He
had compared himself with a star, and other people with falling leaves, and yet he had felt some reproach in
her words.  It was true that he had never fully lost himself in another person to such an extent as to forget
himself; he had never undergone the follies of love for another person.  He had never been able to do this,
and it had then seemed to him that this was the biggest difference between him and the ordinary people.  But
now, since his son was there, he, Siddhartha, had become completely like one of the people, through sorrow,
through loving.  He was madly in love, a fool because of love.  Now he also experienced belatedly, for once
in his life, the strongest and strangest passion; he suffered tremendously through it and yet was uplifted, in
some way renewed and richer.
He felt indeed that this love, this blind love for his son, was a very human passion, that it was Samsara, a
troubled spring of deep water.  At the same time he felt that it was not worthless, that it was necessary, that it
came from his own nature.  This emotion, this pain, these follies also had to be experienced.
In the meantime, his son let him commit his follies, let him strive, let him be humbled by his moods.  There
was nothing about this father that attracted him and nothing that he feared.  This father was a good man, a
kind gentle man, perhaps a pious man, perhaps a holy man-but all these were not qualities which could win
the boy.  This father who kept him in this wretched hut bored him, and when he answered his rudeness with
a smile, every insult with friendliness, every naughtiness with kindness, that was the most hateful cunning of
the old fox.  The boy would have much preferred him to threaten him, to ill-treat him.
A day came when young Siddhartha said what was in his mind and openly turned against his father.  The
latter had told him to gather some twigs.  But the boy did not leave the hut; he stood there, defiant and angry,
stamped on the ground, clenched his fists and forcibly declared his hatred and contempt in his father's face.
"Bring your own twigs," he shouted, foaming.  "I am not your servant.  I know that you do not beat me; you
dare not! I know, however, that you continually punish me and make me feel small with your piety and
indulgence.  You want me to become like you, so pious, so gentle, so wise, but just to spite you, I would
rather become a thief and a murderer and go to hell, than be like you.  I hate you; you are not my father even
if you have been my mother's lover a dozen times!"
Full of rage and misery, he found an outlet in a stream of wild and angry words at his father.  Then the boy
ran away and only returned late in the evening.
The following morning he had disappeared.  A small two-colored basket made of bast in which the ferrymen
kept the copper and silver coins which they received as their payment, had also disappeared.  The boat, too,
had gone.  Siddhartha saw it on the other side of the bank.  The boy had run away.
"I must follow him," said Siddhartha, who had been in great distress since the boy's hard words of the
previous day.  "A child cannot go through the forest alone; he will come to some harm.  We must make a
raft, Vasudeva, in order to cross the river."
"We will make a raft," said Vasudeva, "in order to fetch our boat which the boy took away.  But let him go,
my friend, he is not a child any more, he knows how to look after himself.  He is seeking the way to the
town and he is right.  Do not forget that.  He is doing what you yourself have neglected to do.  He is looking
after himself; he is going his own way.  Oh, Siddhartha, I can see you are suffering, suffering pain over
which one should laugh, over which you will soon laugh yourself."
Siddhartha did not reply.  He already held the hatchet in his hands and began to build a raft from bamboo
and Vasudeva helped him to bind the cane together with grass rope.  Then they sailed across, were driven far
out, but directed the raft upstream to the other bank.
"Why have you brought the hatchet with you?" asked Siddhartha.
Vasudeva said: "It is possible that the oar of our boat is lost."
But Siddhartha knew what his friend was thinking-probably that the boy would have thrown the oar away or
broken it out of revenge and to prevent their following him.  And indeed, there was no longer an oar in the
boat.  Vasudeva indicated the bottom of the boat and smiled at his friend as if to say:  Do you not see what
your son wishes to say?  Do you not see that he does not wish to be followed?  But he did not say it in words
and started to make a new oar.  Siddhartha took leave of him to look for the boy.  Vasudeva did not hinder
him.
Siddhartha had been in the forest a long time when the thought occurred to him that his search was useless.
Either, he thought, the boy had long ago left the wood and reached the town, or if he were still on the way,
he would hide from the pursuer.  And when he reflected further, he found that he was not troubled about his
son, that inwardly he knew he had neither come to any harm nor was threatened with danger in the forest.
Nevertheless, he went on steadily, no longer to save him, but with a desire perhaps to see him again and he
walked up to the outskirts of the town.
When he reached the wide road near the town, he stood still at the entrance to the beautiful pleasure garden
that had once belonged to Kamala, where he had once seen her in a sedan chair for the first time.  The past
rose before his eyes.  Once again he saw himself standing there, a young, bearded, naked Samana, his hair
full of dust.  Siddhartha stood there a long time and looked through the open gate into the garden.  He saw
monks walking about under the beautiful trees.
He stood there for a long time, thinking, seeing pictures, seeing the story of his life.  He stood there a long
time looking at the monks, saw in their place the young Siddhartha and Kamala walking beneath the tall
trees.  Clearly he saw himself attended by Kamala and receiving her first kiss.  He saw how he had
arrogantly and contemptuously looked back on his Samana days, how he had proudly and eagerly begun his
worldly life.  He saw Kamaswami, the servants, the banquets, the dice players, the musicians.  He saw
Kamala's songbird in its cage; he lived it all over again, breathed Samsara, was again old and tired, again felt
nausea and the desire to die, again heard the holy Om.
After he had stood for a long time at the gate to the garden, Siddhartha realized that the desire that had
driven him to this place was foolish, that he could not help his son, that he should not force himself on him.
He felt a deep love for the runaway boy, like a wound, and yet felt at the same time that this wound was not
intended to fester in him, but that it should heal.
Because the wound did not heal during that hour, he was sad.  In place of the goal which had brought him
here after his son, there was only emptiness.  Sadly, he sat down.  He felt something die in his heart; he saw
no more happiness, no goal.  He sat there depressed and waited.  He had learned this from the river: to wait,
to have patience, to listen.  He sat and listened in the dusty road, listened to his heart which beat wearily and
sadly and waited for a voice.  He crouched there and listened for many hours, saw no more visions, sank into
emptiness and let himself sink without seeing a way out.  And when he felt the wound smarting, he
whispered the word Om, filled himself with Om.  The monks in the garden saw him and as he crouched
there for many hours and the dust collected on his grey hairs, one of the monks came towards him and
placed two bananas in front of him.  The old man did not see him.
A hand touching his shoulder awakened him from his trance.  He recognized this gentle, timid touch and
recovered.  He rose and greeted Vasudeva, who had followed him.  When he saw Vasudeva's kind face,
looked at his little laughter wrinkles, into his bright eyes, he smiled also.  He now saw the bananas lying
near him.  He picked them up, gave one to the ferryman and ate the other.  Then he went silently with
Vasudeva through the wood again, back to the ferry.  Neither spoke of what had happened, neither
mentioned the boy's name, neither spoke of his flight, nor of the wound.  Siddhartha went to his bed in the
hut and when Vasudeva went to him after a time to offer him some cocoanut milk, he found him asleep.
Om
The wound smarted for a long time.  Siddhartha took many travellers across the river who had a son or a
daughter with them, and he could not see any of them without envying them, without thinking: So many
people possess this very great happiness-why not I?  Even wicked people, thieves and robbers have children,
love them and are loved by them, except me.  So childishly and illogically did he now reason; so much had
he become like the ordinary people.
He now regarded people in a different light than he had previously: not very clever, not very proud and
therefore all the more warm, curious and sympathetic.
When he now took the usual kind of travellers across, businessmen, soldiers and women, they no longer
seemed alien to him as they once had.  He did not understand or share their thoughts and views, but he
shared with them life's urges and desires.  Although he had reached a high stage of self-discipline and bore
his last wound well, he now felt as if these ordinary people were his brothers.  Their vanities, desires and
trivialities no longer seemed absurd to him; they had become understandable, lovable and even worthy of
respect.  There was the blind love of a mother for her child, the blind foolish pride of a fond father for his
only son, the blind eager strivings of a young vain woman for ornament and the admiration of men.  All
these little simple, foolish, but tremendously strong, vital, passionate urges and desires no longer seemed
trivial to Siddhartha.  For their sake he saw people live and do great things, travel, conduct wars, suffer and
endure immensely, and he loved them for it.  He saw life, vitality, the indestructible and Brahman in all their
desires and needs.  These people were worthy of love and admiration in their blind loyalty, in their blind
strength and tenacity.  With the exception of one small thing, one tiny little thing, they lacked nothing that
the sage and thinker had, and that was the consciousness of the unity of all life.  And many a time Siddhartha
even doubted whether this knowledge, this thought, was of such great value, whether it was not also perhaps
the childish self-flattery of thinkers, who were perhaps only thinking children.  The men of the world were
equal to the thinkers in every other respect and were often superior to them, just as animals in their tenacious
undeviating actions in cases of necessity may often seem superior to human beings.
Within Siddhartha there slowly grew and ripened the knowledge of what wisdom really was and the goal of
his long seeking.  It was nothing but a preparation of the soul, a capacity, a secret art of thinking, feeling and
breathing thoughts of unity at every moment of life.  This thought matured in him slowly, and it was
reflected in Vasudeva's old childlike face: harmony, knowledge of the eternal perfection of the world, and
unity.
But the wound still smarted.  Siddhartha thought yearningly and bitterly about his son nursed his love and
feeling of tenderness for him, let the pain gnaw at him, underwent all the follies of love.  The flame did not
extinguish itself.
One day, when the wound was smarting terribly, Siddhartha rowed across the river consumed by longing,
and got out of the boat with the purpose of going to the town to seek his son.  The river flowed softly and
gently; it was in the dry season but its voice rang out strangely.  It was laughing, it was distinctly laughing!
The river was laughing clearly and merrily at the old ferryman.  Siddhartha stood still; he bent over the
water in order to hear better.  He saw his face reflected in the quietly moving water, and there was
something in this reflection that reminded him of something he had forgotten and when he reflected on it, he
remembered.  His face resembled that of another person, whom he had once known and loved and even
feared.  It resembled the face of his father, the Brahmin.  He remembered how once, as a youth, he had
compelled his father to let him go and join the ascetics, how he had taken leave of him, how he had gone and
never returned.  Had not his father also suffered the same pain that he was now suffering for his son?  Had
not his father died long ago, alone, without having seen his son again?  Did he not expect the same fate?
Was it not a comedy, a strange and stupid thing, this repetition, this course of events in a fateful circle?
The river laughed.  Yes, that was how it was.  Everything that was not suffered to the end and finally
concluded, recurred, and the same sorrows were undergone.  Siddhartha climbed into the boat again and
rowed back to the hut, thinking of his father, thinking of his son, laughed at by the river, in conflict with
himself, verging on despair, and no less inclined to laugh aloud at himself and the whole world.  The wound
still smarted; he still rebelled against his fate.  There was still no serenity and conquest of his suffering.  Yet
he was hopeful and when he returned to the hut, he was filled with an unconquerable desire to confess to
Vasudeva, to disclose everything, to tell everything to the man who knew the art of listening.
Vasudeva sat in the hut weaving a basket.  He no longer worked the ferryboat; his eyes were becoming
weak, also his arms and hands, but unchanged and radiant were the happiness and the serene well-being in
his face.
Siddhartha sat down beside the old man and slowly began to speak.  He told him now what he had never
mentioned before, how he had gone to the town that time, of his smarting wound, of his envy at the sight of
happy fathers, of his knowledge of the folly of such feelings, of his hopeless struggle with himself.  He
mentioned everything, he could tell him everything, even the most painful things; he could disclose
everything.  He displayed his wound, told him of his flight that day, how he had rowed across the river with
the object of wandering into the town, and how the river had laughed.
As he went on speaking and Vasudeva listened to him with a serene face, Siddhartha was more keenly aware
than ever of Vasudeva's attentiveness.  He felt his troubles, his anxieties and his secret hopes flow across to
him and then return again.  Disclosing his wound to this listener was the same as bathing it in the river, until
it became cool and one with the river.  As he went on talking and confessing, Siddhartha felt more and more
that this was no longer Vasudeva, no longer a man who was listening to him.  He felt that this motionless
listener was absorbing his confession as a tree absorbs the rain, that this motionless man was the river itself,
that he was God Himself, that he was eternity itself.  As Siddhartha stopped thinking about himself and his
wound, this recognition of the change in Vasudeva possessed him, and the more he realized it, the less
strange did he find it; the more did he realize that everything was natural and in order, that Vasudeva had
long ago, almost always been like that, only he did not quite recognize it; indeed he himself was hardly
different from him.  He felt that he now regarded Vasudeva as the people regarded the gods and that this
could not last.  Inwardly, he began to take leave of Vasudeva.  In the meantime he went on talking.
When he had finished talking, Vasudeva directed his somewhat weakened glance at him.  He did not speak,
but his face silently radiated love and serenity, understanding and knowledge.  He took Siddhartha's hand,
led him to the seat on the river bank, sat down beside him and smiled at the river.
"You have heard it laugh," he said, "but you have not heard everything.  Let us listen; you will hear more."
They listened.  The many-voiced song of the river echoed softly.  Siddhartha looked into the river and saw
many pictures in the flowing water.  He saw his father, lonely, mourning for his son; he saw himself, lonely,
also with the bonds of longing for his faraway son; he saw his son, also lonely, the boy eagerly advancing
along the burning path of life's desires; each one concentrating on his goal, each one obsessed by his goal,
each one suffering.  The river's voice was sorrowful.  It sang with yearning and sadness, flowing towards its
goal.
"Do you hear?" asked Vasudeva's mute glance.  Siddhartha nodded.
"Listen better!" whispered Vasudeva.
Siddhartha tried to listen better.  The picture of his father, his own picture, and the picture of his son all
flowed into each other.  Kamala's picture also appeared and flowed on, and the picture of Govinda and
others emerged and passed on.  They all became part of the river.  It was the goal of all of them, yearning,
desiring, suffering; and the river's voice was full of longing, full of smarting woe, full of insatiable desire.
The river flowed on towards its goal.  Siddhartha saw the river hasten, made up of himself and his relatives
and all the people he had ever seen.  All the waves and water hastened, suffering, towards goals, many goals,
to the waterfall, to the sea, to the current, to the ocean and all goals were reached and each one was
succeeded by another.  The water changed to vapor and rose, became rain and came down again, became
spring, brook and river, changed anew, flowed anew.  But the yearning voice had altered.  It still echoed
sorrowfully, searchingly, but other voices accompanied it, voices of pleasure and sorrow, good and evil
voices, laughing and lamenting voices, hundreds of voices, thousands of voices.
Siddhartha listened.  He was now listening intently, completely absorbed, quite empty, taking in everything.
He felt that he had now completely learned the art of listening.  He had often heard all this before, all these
numerous voices in the river, but today they sounded different.  He could no longer distinguish the different
voices -the merry voice from the weeping voice, the childish voice from the manly voice.  They all belonged
to each other: the lament of those who yearn, the laughter of the wise, the cry of indignation and the groan of
the dying.  They were all interwoven and interlocked, entwined in a thousand ways.  And all the voices, all
the goals, all the yearnings, all the sorrows, all the pleasures, all the good and evil, all of them together was
the world.  All of them together was the stream of events, the music of life.  When Siddhartha listened
attentively to this river, to this song of a thousand voices; when he did not listen to the sorrow or laughter,
when he did not bind his soul to any one particular voice and absorb it in his Self, but heard them all, the
whole, the unity; then the great song of a thousand voices consisted of one word: Om - perfection.
"Do you hear?" asked Vasudeva's glance once again.
Vasudeva's smile was radiant; it hovered brightly in all the wrinkles of his old face, as the Om hovered over
all the voices of the river.  His smile was radiant as he looked at his friend, and now the same smile appeared
on Siddhartha's face.  His wound was healing his pain was dispersing; his Self had merged into unity.
From that hour Siddhartha ceased to fight against his destiny.  There shone in his face the serenity of
knowledge, of one who is no longer confronted with conflict of desires, who has found salvation, who is in
harmony with the stream of events, with the stream of life, full of sympathy and compassion, surrendering
himself to the stream, belonging to the unity of all things.
As Vasudeva rose from the seat on the river bank, when he looked into Siddhartha's eyes and saw the
serenity of knowledge shining in them, he touched his shoulder gently in his kind protective way and said: I
have waited for this hour, my friend.  Now that it has arrived, let me go.  I have been Vasudeva, the
ferryman, for a long time.  Now it is over.  Farewell hut, farewell river, farewell "
Siddhartha bowed low before the departing man.
"I knew it," he said softly.  "Are you going into the woods?"
"Yes, I am going into the woods; I am going into the unity of all things," said Vasudeva, radiant.
And so he went away.  Siddhartha watched him.  With great joy and gravity100 he watched him, saw his steps
full of peace, his face glowing, his form full of light.
Govinda
Govinda once spent a rest period with some other monks in the pleasure grove which Kamala, the courtesan,
had once presented to the followers of Gotama.  He heard talk of an old ferryman who lived by the river, a
day's journey away, and whom many considered to be a sage.  When Govinda moved on, he chose the path
to the ferry, eager to see this ferryman, for although he had lived his life according to the rule and was also
regarded with respect by the younger monks for his age and modesty, there was still restlessness in his heart
and his seeking was unsatisfied.
He arrived at the river and asked the old man to take him across.  When they climbed out of the boat on the
other side, he said to the old man: "You show much kindness to the monks and pilgrims; you have taken
many of us across.  Are you not also a seeker of the right path?"
There was a smile in siddhartha's old eyes as he said: "Do you call yourself a seeker, O venerable one, you
who are already advanced in years and wear the robe of Gotama's monks?"
"I am indeed old," said Govinda, "but I have never ceased seeking.  I will never cease seeking.  That seems
to be my destiny.  It seems to me that you also have sought.  Will you talk to me a little about it, my friend?
Siddhartha said: "What could I say to you that would be of value, except that perhaps you seek too much,
that as a result of your seeking you cannot find."
"How is that?" asked Govinda.
"When someone is seeking," said Siddhartha, "it happens quite easily that he only sees the thing that he is
seeking; that he is unable to find anything, unable to absorb anything, because he is only thinking of the
thing he is seeking, because he has a goal, because he is obsessed with his goal.  Seeking means: to have a
goal; but finding means: to be free, to be receptive, to have no goal.  You, O worthy one, are perhaps indeed
a seeker, for in striving towards your goal, you do not see many things that are under your nose."
"I do not yet quite understand, said Govinda.  "How do you mean?"
Siddhartha said: "Once, O worthy one, many years ago, you came to this river and found a man sleeping
there.  You sat beside him to guard him while he slept, but you did not recognize the sleeping man,
Govinda."
Astonished and like one bewitched the monk gazed at the ferryman.
"Are you Siddhartha?" he asked in a timid voice.  I did not recognize you this time, too.  I am very pleased
to see you again, Siddhartha, very pleased.  You have changed very much, my friend.  And have you
become a ferryman now?"
Siddhartha laughed warmly.  "Yes, I have become a ferryman.  Many people have to change a great deal and
wear all sorts of clothes.  I am one of those, my friend.  You are very welcome, Govinda, and I invite you to
stay the night in my hut."
Govinda stayed the night in the hut and slept in the bed that had once been Vasudeva's.  He asked the friend
of his youth many questions and Siddhartha had a great deal to tell him about his life.
When it was time for Govinda to depart the following morning, he said with some hesitation: "Before I go
on my way, Siddhartha, I should like to ask you one more question.  Have you a doctrine, belief or
knowledge which you uphold, which helps you to live and do right?"
Siddhartha said: "You know, my friend, that even as a young man, when we lived with the ascetics in the
forest, I came to distrust doctrines and teachers and to turn my back on them.  I am still of the same turn of
mind, although I have, since that time, had many teachers.  A beautiful courtesan was my teacher for a long
time, and a rich merchant and a dice player.  On one occasion, one of the Buddha's wandering monks was
my teacher.  He halted in his pilgrimage to sit beside me when I fell asleep in the forest.  I also learned
something from him and I am grateful to him, very grateful.  But most of all, I have learned from this river
and from my predecessor, Vasudeva.  He was a simple man; he was not a thinker, but he realized the
essential as well as Gotama.  He was a holy man, a saint."
Govinda said: "It seems to me, Siddhartha, that you still like to jest a little.  I believe you and know that you
have not followed any teacher, but have you not yourself, if not a doctrine, certain thoughts?  Have you not
discovered certain knowledge yourself that has helped you to live?  It would give me great pleasure if you
would tell me something about this."
Siddhartha said: "Yes, I have had thoughts and knowledge here and there.  Sometimes, for an hour or for a
day, I have become aware of knowledge, just as one feels life in one's heart.  I have had many thoughts, but
it would be difficult for me to tell you about them.  But this is one thought that has impressed me, Govinda.
Wisdom is not communicable.  The wisdom which a wise man tries to communicate always sounds foolish."
"Are you jesting?" asked Govinda.
"No, I am telling you what I have discovered.  Knowledge can be communicated, but not wisdom.  One can
find it, live it, be fortified by it, do wonders through it, but one cannot communicate and teach it.  I
suspected this when I was still a youth and it was this that drove me away from teachers.  There is one
thought I have had, Govinda, which you will again think is a jest or folly: that is, in every truth the opposite
is equally true.  For example, a truth can only be expressed and enveloped in words if it is one-sided.
Everything that is thought and expressed in words is one-sided, only half the truth; it all lacks totality,
completeness, unity.  When the Illustrious Buddha taught about the world, he had to divide it into Samsara
and Nirvana, into illusion and truth, into suffering and salvation.  One cannot do otherwise, there is no other
method for those who teach.  But the world itself, being in and around us, is never one-sided.  Never is a
man or a deed wholly Samsara or wholly Nirvana; never is a man wholly a saint or a sinner.  This only
seems so because we suffer the illusion that time is something real.  Time is not real, Govinda.  I have
realized this repeatedly.  And if time is not real, then the dividing line that seems to lie between this world
and eternity, between suffering and bliss, between good and evil, is also an illusion.
"How is that?" asked Govinda, puzzled.
"Listen, my friend! I am a sinner and you are a sinner, but someday the sinner will be Brahma again, will
someday attain Nirvana, will someday become a Buddha.  Now this 'someday' is illusion; it is only a
comparison.  The sinner is not on the way to a Buddha-like state; he is not evolving, although our thinking
cannot conceive things otherwise.  No, the potential Buddha already exists in the sinner; his future is already
there.  The potential hidden Buddha must be recognized in him, in you, in everybody.  The world, Govinda,
is not imperfect or slowly evolving along a long path to perfection.  No, it is perfect at every moment; every
sin already carries grace within it, all small children are potential old men, all sucklings have death within
them, all dying people--eternal life.  It is not possible for one person to see how far another is on the way;
the Buddha exists in the robber and dice player; the robber exists in the Brahmin.  During deep meditation it
is possible to dispel time, to see simultaneously all the past, present and future, and then everything is good,
everything is perfect, everything is Brahman.  Therefore, it seems to me that everything that exists is good-
death as well as life, sin as well as holiness, wisdom as well as folly.  Everything is necessary, everything
needs only my agreement, my assent, my loving understanding; then all is well with me and nothing can
harm me.  I learned through my body and soul that it was necessary for me to sin, that I needed lust, that I
had to strive for property and experience nausea and the depths of despair in order to learn not to resist them,
in order to learn to love the world, and no longer compare it with some kind of desired imaginary world,
some imaginary vision of perfection, but to leave it as it is, to love it' and be glad to belong to it.  These,
Govinda, are some of the thoughts that are in my mind."
Siddhartha bent down, lifted a stone from the ground and held it in his hand.
"This," he said, handling it, is a stone, and within a certain length of time it will perhaps be soil and from the
soil it will become plant, animal or man.  Previously I should have said: This stone is just a stone; it has no
value, it belongs to the world of Maya, but perhaps because within the cycle of change it can also become
man and spirit, it is also of importance.  That is what I should have thought. But now I think: This stone is
stone; it is also animal, God and Buddha.  I do not respect and love it because it was one thing and will
become something else, but because it has already long been everything and always is everything.  I love it
just because it is a stone, because today and now it appears to me a stone.  I see value and meaning in each
one of its fine markings and cavities, in the yellow, in the gray, in the hardness and the sound of it when I
knock it, in the dryness or dampness of its surface.  There are stones that feel like oil or soap, that look like
leaves or sand, and each one is different and worships Om in its own way; each one is Brahman.  At the
same time it is very much stone, oily or soapy, and that is just what pleases me and seems wonderful and
worthy of worship.  But I will say no more about it.  Words do not express thoughts very well.  They always
become a little different immediately they are expressed, a little distorted, a little foolish.  And yet it also
pleases me and seems right that what is of value and wisdom to one man seems nonsense to another."
Govinda had listened in silence.
"Why did you tell me about the stone?" he asked, hesitatingly after a pause.
"I did so unintentionally.  But perhaps it illustrates that I just love the stone and the river and all these things
that we see and from which we can learn.  I can love a stone, Govinda, and a tree or a piece of bark.  These
are things and one can love things.  But one cannot love words.  Therefore teachings are of no use to me;
they have no hardness, no softness, nor colors, no corners, no smell, no taste-they have nothing but words.
Perhaps that is what prevents you from finding peace, perhaps there are too many words, for even salvation
and virtue.  Samsara and Nirvana are only words, Govinda.  Nirvana is not a thing; there is only the word
Nirvana."
Govinda said: "Nirvana is not only a word, my friend; it is a thought."
Siddhartha continued: "It may be a thought, but I must confess, my friend, that I do not differentiate very
much between thoughts and words.  Quite frankly, I do not attach great importance to thoughts either.  I
attach more importance to things.  For example, there was a man at this ferry who was my predecessor and
teacher.  He was a holy man who for many years believed only in the river and nothing else.  He noticed that
the river's voice spoke to him.  He learned from it; it educated and taught him.  The river seemed like a god
to him and for many years he did not know that every wind, every cloud, every bird, every beetle is equally
divine and knows and can teach just as well as the esteemed river.  But when this holy man went off into the
woods, he knew everything; he knew more than you and I, without teachers, without books, just because he
believed in the river."
Govinda said: "But what you call thing, is it something real, something intrinsic?  Is it not only the illusion
of Maya, only image and appearance?  Your stone, your tree, are they real?"
"This also does not trouble me much," said Siddhartha.  "If they are illusion, then I also am illusion, and so
they are always of the same nature as myself.  It is that which makes them so lovable and venerable.  That is
why I can love them.  And here is a doctrine at which you will laugh.  It seems to me, Govinda, that love is
the most important thing in the world.  It may be important to great thinkers to examine the world, to explain
and despise it.  But I think it is only important to love the world, not to despise it, not for us to hate each
other, but to be able to regard the world and ourselves and all beings with love, admiration and respect."
"I understand that," said Govinda, "but that is just what the Illustrious One called illusion.  He preached
benevolence, forbearance, sympathy, patience, but not love.  He forbade us to bind ourselves to earthly
love."
"I know that," said Siddhartha smiling radiantly, "I know that, Govinda, and here we find ourselves within
the maze of meanings, within the conflict of words, for I will not deny that my words about love are in
apparent contradiction to the teachings of Gotama.  That is just why I distrust words so much, for I know
that this contradiction is an illusion.  I know that I am at one with Gotama.  How, indeed, could he not know
love, he who has recognized all humanity's vanity and transitoriness, yet loves humanity so much that he has
devoted a long life solely to help and teach people?  Also with this great teacher, the thing to me is of greater
importance than the words; his deeds and life are more important to me than his talk, the gesture of his hand
is more important to me than his opinions.  Not in speech or thought do I regard him as a great man, but in
his deeds and life."
The two old men were silent for a long time.  Then as Govinda was preparing to go, he said: "I thank you,
Siddhartha, for telling me something of your thoughts.  Some of them are strange thoughts.  I cannot grasp
them all immediately.  However, I thank you, and I wish you many peaceful days.
Inwardly, however, he thought: Siddhartha is a strange man and he expresses strange thoughts.  His ideas
seem crazy.  How different do the Illustrious One's doctrines sound! They are clear, straightforward,
comprehensible; they contain nothing strange, wild or laughable.  But Siddhartha's hands and feet, his eyes,
his brow, his breathing, his smile, his greeting, his gait affect me differently from his thoughts.  Never, since
the time our Illustrious Gotama passed into Nirvana, have I ever met a man with the exception of Siddhartha
about whom I felt: This is a holy man!  His ideas may be strange, his words may sound foolish, but his
glance and his hand, his skin and his hair, all radiate a purity, peace, serenity, gentleness and saintliness
which I have never seen in any man since the recent death of our illustrious teacher.
While Govinda was thinking these thoughts and there was conflict in his heart, he again bowed to
Siddhartha, full of affection towards him.  He bowed low before the quietly seated man.
"Siddhartha," he said, "we are now old men.  We may never see each other again in this life.  I can see, my
dear friend, that you have found peace.  I realize that I have not found it.  Tell me one more word, my
esteemed friend, tell me something that I can conceive, something I can understand! Give me something to
help me on my way, Siddhartha.  My path is often hard and dark."
Siddhartha was silent and looked at him with his calm, peaceful smile.  Govinda looked steadily in his face,
with anxiety, with longing.  Suffering, continual seeking and continual failure were written in his look.
Siddhartha saw it and smiled.
"Bend near to me!" he whispered in Govinda's ear.  "Come, still nearer, quite close! Kiss me on the
forehead, Govinda."
Although surprised, Govinda was compelled by a great love and presentiment to obey him; he leaned close
to him and touched his forehead with his lips.  As he did this, something wonderful happened to him.  While
he was still dwelling on Siddhartha's strange words, while he strove in vain to dispel the conception of time,
to imagine Nirvana and Samsara as one, while even a certain contempt for his friend's words conflicted with
a tremendous love and esteem for him, this happened to him.
He no longer saw the face of his friend Siddhartha.  Instead he saw other faces, many faces, a long series, a
continuous stream of faces-hundreds, thousands, which all came and disappeared and yet all seemed to be
there at the same time, which all continually changed and renewed themselves and which were yet all
Siddhartha.  He saw the face of a fish, of a carp, with tremendous painfully opened mouth, a dying fish with
dimmed eyes.  He saw the face of a newly born child, red and full of wrinkles, ready to cry.  He saw the face
of a murderer, saw him plunge a knife into the body of a man; at the same moment he saw this criminal
kneeling down, bound, and his head cut off by an executioner.  He saw the naked bodies of men and women
in the postures and transports of passionate love.  He saw corpses stretched out, still, cold, empty.  He saw
the heads of animals-boars, crocodiles, elephants, oxen, birds.  He saw Krishna101 and Agni.102  He saw all
these forms and faces in a thousand relationships to each other, all helping each other, loving, hating and
destroying each other and become newly born.  Each one was mortal, a passionate, painful example of all
that is transitory.  Yet none of them died, they only changed, were always reborn, continually had a new
face: only time stood between one face and another.  And all these forms and faces rested, flowed,
reproduced, swam past and merged into each other, and over them all there was continually something thin,
unreal and yet existing, stretched across like thin glass or ice, like a transparent skin, shell, form or mask of
water-and this mask was Siddhartha's smiling face which Govinda touched with his lips at that moment.
And Govinda saw that this mask-like smile, this smile of unity over the flowing forms, this smile of
simultaneousness over the thousands of births and deaths -this smile of Siddhartha-was exactly the same as
the calm, delicate, impenetrable, perhaps gracious, perhaps mocking, wise, thousand-fold smile of Gotama,
the Buddha, as he perceived it with awe a hundred times.  It was in such a manner, Govinda knew, that the
Perfect One smiled.
No longer knowing whether time existed, whether this display had lasted a second or a hundred years,
whether there was a Siddhartha, or a Gotama, a Self and others, wounded deeply by a divine arrow which
gave him pleasure, deeply enchanted and exalted, Govinda stood yet a while bending over Siddhartha's
peaceful face which he had just kissed, which had just been the stage of all present and future forms.  His
countenance was unchanged after the mirror of the thousand-fold forms had disappeared from the surface.
He smiled peacefully and gently, perhaps very graciously, perhaps very mockingly, exactly as the Illustrious
One had smiled.
Govinda bowed low.  Incontrollable tears trickled down his old face.  He was overwhelmed by a feeling of
great love, of the most humble veneration.103  He bowed low, right down to the ground, in front of the man
sitting there motionless, whose smile reminded him of everything that he had ever loved in his life, of
everything that had ever been of value and holy in his life.
****
Reference Books used:
Encyclopedia Americana
Encyclopedia of Religion
Conze
Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages, London: Oxford Univ.Press, 1966
Dictionary of Beliefs and Religions
Dictionary of Comparative Religion
Eastern Definitions: a short encyclopedia of religions of the orient. Edward Rice.  Doubleday & Co., NC,
1978.
Goddesses in World Mythology
Harper Collins Dictionary of Religion
Historical Dictionary of Buddhism
Internet – Yahoo Altavista
Larousse Dictionary of Beliefs and Religions
Lexikon für Theologie und Kirche, Freiburg: Herder, 1967
Oxford’s Dictionary of Philosophy
Oxford Dictionary of World Religions
Philosophies of India, by Heinrich Zimmer, Bolingen Series, Princeton, 1971
Random House Unabridged Dictionary
Rider Encyclopedia of Eastern Philosophy and Religion, 1986
The World's Great Religions I: The Religions of the East, New York: Time, 1957
The World of Buddhism, H.B. Johannesburg
Webster’s New College Dictionary
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary (Unabridged)
                                                       
1 sallow wood, of sal trees, a willowlike shrub growing about 8 feet high with narrow leaves that are silvery on the
underside.  It produces orange-yellow fruits about 1/3 inch in diameter.  It is common on sand dunes along the eastern
and southeastern coast of Great Britain and is widely distributed in the mountains of Europe and Asia.  The wood is a
good source of charcoal and tanbark.  In India it grows in (sacred) groves along riverbanks and is used to produce many
different craft products, due to its flexibility and beautiful color.2 fig tree: any of the genus of fig-bearing trees of the mulberry family, especially any of the many cultivated varieties
bearing edible fruit.  The hollow, pear-shaped false fruit of the fig tree, with sweet, pulpy flesh contains numerous tiny,
seedlike true fruits.3 “Siddhartha” was given the original name of Prince Siddhartha Gautama (Gotama), the later Buddha (564-483 B.C.)
who was the prince of a small S(h)akya Kingdom located in the foothills of the Himalayas in Nepal.  He abandoned his
home and family and wandered forth as a religious beggar, searching for the meaning of existence, becoming a spiritual
leader in the “Buddhist” religion.  He died at age 80 from eating spoiled food.  Hesse’s character Siddhartha achieved
salvation in much the same way as the Buddha, but following his own path and not leading a major religion.  The name
Siddhartha means in Sanskrit: he who has found the way (goal).4 Brahmin: a believer in the ultimate reality called Brahman, possessing that state of mind.  Brahman, which makes
possible time, space, and natural order, is external unity lying beyond all limits and description.  A Brahmin belongs to
the first of the four Hindu castes, which is considered the sacerdotal class, the members of which may be, but are not
necessarily, priests who serve the spiritual needs of the Hindu community.  Brahmins are the only people who could
perform correct worship.  Most Brahmins were highly literate and hold jobs in law and the medical professions.
According to strict dietary rules, they could not consume any meat products or alcohol.  According to Hindu
mythology, a Brahmin is the chief of all created beings, his person is inviolate, he is entitled to all honor, and enjoys
many rights, privileges, and much wealth.  Under the law of Manu, the life of a Brahmin was divided into four
ashramas or stages (1) Brahmchari; (2) Grishastha; (3) Vanaprastha; and (4) Sannyasi.  The divisions and sub-divisions
of the Brahma caste are almost innumerable but the five divisions are the main ones: (1) Kanyakubja; (2) Saraswata;
(3) Gauda; (4) Mithila; and (5) Utkala.5 Govinda, now a common Hindi name for boys, was the name of Krishna, given to him by Indra, the highest Vedic
god, after having preserved the cattle by raising the mountain Govardhana.  Govinda is he who knows, finds, or tends
cattle.  As the Indra of cows he was called Govinda.  Pilgrims invoke Govinda when traveling to Tripati.  It was also
the name of the famous 12th century poet Gita Govinda, as well as the name of a famous Buddhist scholar of German
                                                                                                                                                                                      
origin and contemporary of Hesse who practiced Tibetan Buddhism and whose many religious publications made it
into Western culture when translations appeared in Western languages.6 Holy ablutions: a religious rite and prescribed ritual washing in one of the holy rivers of India of part or all of the
body or of possessions, such as clothing or ceremonial objects, with the intent of purification, cleansing of sins, or
dedication in preparation for prayer.  Holy ablutions are performed in the morning and evening.  Water, or water with
salt or some other traditional ingredient, is most commonly used.  But washing with blood is not uncommon in the
history of religions, and urin of the sacred cow has been used in India.7 sacrifices: are an act or offering to a deity of something precious, i.e. the killing of a victim on an altar.  It is the
destruction or surrender of something for something else, as is often the case to please a God or gods.  It is to suffer the
loss of, give up, injure, or destroy for an ideal, belief, or end.8 Mango: is the most important edible tropical fruit in India, cultivated for thousands of years and in almost every part
of India.  It is yellow-red with thick rind, somewhat acid and juicy pulp, and a hard stone; it is eaten when ripe, or
preserved or pickled when unripe.  The mango tree is grown in groves (orchards), and the home gardens in the villages
and provides excellent shade in the heat of the tropical sun.  Several varieties are grown, from the large Alfonso variety
and the extremely sweet Bengarappally variety found in Andhra Pradesh, to small indigenous ones.  The mango tree
requires a high temperature with a heavy rainfall in the period before flowering, and a dry season for ripening of the
fruit.9 Art of contemplation: a form of meditation or non-discursive prayer in which the person actively contemplates an
object, concept, or holy verse from a religious text, working to keep other things at bay.  It is the ability to concentrate
on spiritual thoughts or ideas as a way of showing private devotion.  With the idea of elevating the mind over matter,
the art of contemplation is a widespread practice throughout virtually all of the major religions, including Judeo-
Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism.  Before becoming the Buddha, Prince Siddhartha Gautama sat under the Bodhi tree
in contemplation for several days.  This resulted in his becoming “The Enlightened One.”  The term contemplation is
used throughout the book, because the idea of contemplation is present in all religions.  Contemplation is essential to
meditation, because it is one of the main acts practiced in meditation.10 Meditation: religious discipline, the practice of mental concentration on a single point of reference leading
ultimately through a succession of stages to the final goal of spiritual freedom, nirvana.  Buddhists describe the
culminating trancelike state as transient; final nirvana requires the insight of wisdom.  Meditation consists of
techniques such as Yoga, Transcendental Meditation, Contemplation, assorted forms of prayer, and abstraction and is
regarded as conducive to heightened spiritual awareness or somatic calm and restfulness as beliefs and inner being
become one.  Meditation may be a means of invoking divine grace, as in the contemplation by Christian mystics of a
spiritual theme, question, or problem; or it may be a means of attaining conscious union with the divine, e.g., through
visualization of a deity or inward repetition of a prayer or mantra (sacred sound).  Employed since ancient times in
various forms by all religions, the practice gained greater notice in the postwar U.S. as interest in Zen-Buddhism rose.
In the 1960s and 70s the Indian Maharishi Mahesh Yogi popularized a mantra system called transcendental meditation.
Meditation is now used by many non-religious adherents as a method of stress reduction; it is known to lessen levels of
cortisol, a hormone released in response to stress.  The practice has been shown to enhance recuperation and improve
the body’s resistance to disease.11 Om: a Sanskrit syllable or word meaning “One” or “Universal”, composed of the three letters a, u, m.  It is declared
in the Katha Upanishads, where it first appears, to have mystic power and to be worthy of the deepest meditation:
“The word which all the Vedas rehearse,
And which all austerities proclaim,
Desiring which men live the life of religious studentship -
That word to thee I briefly declare.
That is Om!”
It has become a manifestation of spiritual power, a symbol of solemn invocation, affirmation (“yes”), benediction, and
consent, the presence of the “Universal” within.  The word is used as a mantra at the commencement of prayers and
religious ceremonies, and is generally placed at the beginning of books in order to render a mystic significance.Om is
considered to be a manifestation of spiritual power and visible truth and is a symbol of form as well as sound.  The
physical, mental and unconscious are represented in the letters of the syllable Om.  Om is the one consciousness, and
all other objects and concepts are permutations of Om.12 Atman: in the Rig-Veda it means “breath” (German: “Atem”), the Hindu word for “self”, it is the process where the
individual discovers that he lives in the shadow of the Real (Brahman); so that the quest for the “self” is transformed
into the quest for the Transcendent, and the reality of the world around begins to fade from view.  It can also be defined
as the eternal core, the innermost essence of the individual, nameless and formless, that survives after death and that
                                                                                                                                                                                      
transmigrates to a new life or is released from the bonds of existence.  Siddhartha works toward the goal of of
recognizing the relationship between the Atman (self) and Brahman (reality) as he changes roles in life, moving to
understand himself and his relationship with reality.13 The religious practices of Buddhism began in the 6th and 5th centuries B.C.E. in India with the enlightenment of
Gotama.  Although hesitant initially, he was persuaded to share the truth of and way to enlightenment by Brahma on
behalf of the gods.  His teaching were called Dharma (the law).  Dharma is the maintenance of order which makes life
possible.  It is a cosmic law, according to the law of karma.  Buddha made himself a manifestation of the truth that is
dharma.  It then becomes the practice of truth, the path towards nirvana, where dharma becomes the same.  The
dharmas exhibit the constitution of all appearances and how they function.  The Buddha was seen as a guide and
thought of himself as a physician of the mind, diagnosing sickness and offering treatment.  His teachings included
components of Hindu cosmology and psychology, but he modified them drastically.  He taught of the soul (self,
Atman) which is continually reborn and moves toward salvation, controlled by Karma.  The integrity of one’s Karma
determined whether he/she would move up the ladder of worldly existence until finally Nirvana, or enlightenment, was
realized.  He changed it into his belief that there is no soul; this doctrine is is referred to as anatman.  Also, there cannot
be an external God who creates it.  Gods are part of the process.  The teaching of the Buddha are summarized in the
Four Noble Truths including the Eightfold Path to salvation or reincarnation, and the twelve-step chain of cause.  The
Four Noble truths are as follows: (1) the world is full of suffering (or dukkha), (2) thirst or cravings (tanha) give rise to
suffering (thirst for pleasure satisfaction), (3) dukkha can end by elimination of tanha which leads to nirvana, (4) the
eightfold path is the means to that elimination.  The first truth is the recognition of the universal nature of suffering, or
the fact of transience which involves suffering.  Buddhists do not, however, deny that some things are pleasant; the
second truth is the recognition of the cause of suffering which is the thirst for permanence; the third truth is that
suffering be stopped by attaining nirvana; the fourth truth is the summary in the Eightfold Path, the means to
eradication.14 ardent: extreme interest in pursuit of something; showing great warmth or intensity of feeling; eagerness
15 vocation: (past participle vocatus of Latin vocare -> to call; German, since Martin Luther: Berufung -> Beruf) an
inclination, as if in response to a summons to undertake a certain kind of work, especially a religious career
(priesthood, religious order); a calling.  In the story, Siddhartha has a calling to leave his father and find his own path to
enlightenment.16 atonement traditionally means to cleanse the body or mind or to reconcile one's past actions.  In religious functions
such as those of churches, temples, etc., atonement is usually sought through repentance.  Atonement is just what is
says, cleansing oneself of sins (The Bath of A.), to get to be "at one" again and reconcile with some higher principle, be
it the rule of government, the law, morality, religion, or with one's own conscience.  In the Chrsitian tradition it means
that reconciliation with God is accomplished through the death of Christ.  There is also a Day of Atonement.  In Vedic
tradition, people would bathe in holy water (River Ganges) not only for hygienic reasons, but mostly in order to atone
for their errors and sins.17 river: among Hindus, rivers and all water are particuylarly sacred.  There are seven which are especially revered:
Ganges, Godavari, Saravati, Narmada, Sindhu, Kaveri, and Yamuna.  Yamuna is the river which Krishna protected by
killing the snake which poisoned it.  Water in general is a cleansing entity.18 Rig Veda: (Veda = wisdom, divine knowledge, Skt.), the first of four parts of Veda, a collection of 1028 hymns in ten
books making up the most sacred books of the Hindus, dating before the second millennium B.C. and thus the oldest
religious scripture in the world.  Its language is archaic Vedic Sanskrit transmitted in the oral tradition by various
professional bards from ancient times and eventually written down.  The Vedas focus primarily on praising cosmic
order and address various deities, primarily Agni, god of fire, and Sama, god of immortality or “nondeath”.  Vedic
literature begins with the Rig-Veda, probably dating from about 12-1300 B.C.  The Rig-Veda, Atharva-Veda, and
Sama-Veda are purely metrical texts used by Priests in their rituals.19 Prajapati is the supreme being and father of all Hindu gods (and demons), also referred to as Brahma, the "Lord of
Creatures," in later literature.  In the Vedas Prajapati is used to refer to Indra, Savitri and other deities.  It is said that he
sacrificed himself in "exhausting fervor" of ascetic and erotic heat, thus creating the sacred verbal power and creation
of the gods and humans and giving them life through his imagination.  The Vedic ritual is often conceived as a
restorative act that reunites Prajapati's dispersed parts (the manifest universe) into a constructed whole.  According to
Vedic traditions and discourses, he symbolizes the sacrifice, asceticism and self-mortification, and the concept of
salvation representative of the samanas.  He is one of the "Trinity" or "Absolute", which includes Brahma, S(h)iva the
destroyer, and Vishnu the preserver.  He appears in the Brahmanas to be the individual creator (of creative activity).
He is described as self existent and as evolving from primal waters, from an egg, which brings the doctrine of the
cosmic egg.  After undertaking ascetic practices (tapas), and with the help of his female counterpart Vac, Prajapati
                                                                                                                                                                                      
produces the universe and all of its creatures.  The Mahabhavata (one of the most epic, monumental and voluminous
pieces of Hindu or Indian literature) speaks of twenty-one Prajapatis.  Siddhartha questions if it was really Prajapati
who created the world, or was it Atman.  This shows Siddhartha's move away from the religion he was brought up in,
and his curiosity to find the truth of his chosen religion.20 Self: an idea of the workings of one’s body.  In Buddhism the spirituality which exists in every person.  This Self is
connected to that which makes everyone part of a whole.21 Upanishads, is the general term ("esoteric doctrine") for the group of codified Sanskrit philosophical speculations of
varying length.  They are found both in prose and verse form, often composed orally and put to memory by anonymous
South Asian sages in classical and medieval times.  They were written down between 1000 and 500 B.C. and appear to
be intended as a later addition to the Rig-Veda.  The word Upanishad means "sitting at the foot of the teacher."  It
discusses gaining a mystical form of knowledge that allows the individual to escape the cycle of rebirth, to reach
release.  The Upanishad represented the beginning of philosophy in India by presenting insights and doctrines,
developed the concept of a single supreme being, the Brahma, and investigated the nature of reality, the "hidden
meaning" or "real message" in religious thought, the unity of Atman and Brahman.  Siddhartha has studied the
Upanishad and reflects upon it and the phrase, "The soul is the whole world." (cf. Chandogya-Upanishads, part of the
supplementary treatise of the third Veda, poetic in writing for convenience of liturgical use).22 Sama-Veda, or the (3rd) Veda of the chants, is a collection of verses taken mostly from the Rig-Veda and an
anthology to Rig-Veda literature.  Being one of the Samhitas, it is a collection of mantras and tunes used in connection
with the Rig-Veda (cf. Rig-Veda), and arranged for chanting at the Soma ritual.  Sama means music or "hearing" music
so as to nourish oneself spiritually.23 Chandogya-Upanishad, one of the earliest Upanishads, also one of the thirteen principal Upanishads.  It shows that
if any ritual is done without proper knowledge, it is worse than useless.  The Ch.U. holds the story of Sceta Ketu (about
a young boy who was told to split the fruit of the Banyan tree until he could see nothing, although he learned that you
can only get nothing out of nothing).  It deals with the mystical image of of selves/souls as sparks from the divine fire,
and that of Atman as smaller than a grain of rice yet greater than the sky.  The Ch.U. helped develop ideas Hinduism
would later follow, such as that the self is identified with Brahman.  Siddhartha often said to himself the word from one
of the Chandogya-Upanishads: "In truth, the name of Brahma is Satya.  Indeed he who knows it enters the heavenly
world each day."24 Brahman: as the origin of the universe, Brahman is the supreme, all-pervading spirit.  It is also seen as the
impersonal Absolute.  The earliest use of the word is found in theVedas, where its meaning is the mysterious force
behind a magical formula.  It is a ritual power for those who teach it.  In the Upanishads it takes on the meaning of the
source of power, the principle behind the origin of the universe and the gods.  It is taught that Brahman is the essence
of the self in all beings.  Brahman is the ultimate goal as it releases one from the ongoing cycle of suffering and rebirth.25 Satya is one of the five restraints, that from falsehood.  It represents truth, truthfulness, righteousness, correctness,
order in Indian philosophy.  It is one of the five great vows of the Yatis.  It asks: "How do you live truthfulness in your
life?"  When Siddhartha says that "the name of Brahma is Satya," he is saying that the Brahma is true.  Satyakama and
other Satya persons are Vedic teachers of unknown origin whose adherence to truth is found in the Chandogya-
Upanishads.26 The Banyan (fig-) tree (ficus benghalensis) originated in tropical India and the East Indies and is also found in
tropical Africa.  It is quite ornamental, has large oval leaves, reddish fruit, and is widely spread by many aerial roots
which descend from branches, supporting them and then taking root thus becoming new trunks.  They often grow very
wide and to an average height of 70-100 feet and live many ages.  Merchants often use the enclosures formed by the
trees as market shelter.  They are considered sacred in the Hindu religion.  This explains why Siddhartha and Govinda
meditate under it early in the novel.  The tree is honored as "Our Mother" by the Sauras in India.  It is said it saved two
motherless children by feeding them milk.27 Samanas were wandering ascetics (cf.sadhus = Hindi ascetics and holy men).  The word samana means novice.
Buddhist samanas, which the ones in the novel are, were seemingly in search of pureness and a cleansed soul and were
highly respected by the kings and nobility and also commoners, all of whom gave them food, lodging and other
necessities of life.  In return, the samanas gave these people lessons from the dharma.  The samanas practiced
meditation and "unpitying self-denial."28 An ascetic is a person who renounces material comforts and leads a life of austere self-discipline, especially as an act
of religious devotion and penance.  The word "Asceticism" (cf. Grk. Askçtikos) derives from the Greek philosophical,
spiritual, ethical, and gymnastic exercises (Grk. askein > to exercise) of the will, mind, and body.  It is the opposite of
sensuality and is expected to lead to the development of virtue and strength through exercises, self-denial and
mortification.  Exercises include celibacy, fasting, posture, silence, unpleasant tasks and withdrawal from human
                                                                                                                                                                                      
companionship.  It was designed to free the spirit from the body's demands, to subdue one's appetites and discipline
oneself to reach a high state, spiritually and intellectually.  The first to believe in the idea of reincarnation were ascetics.
(cf. Harper Collins Dictionary of Religion, © 1995, American Academy of Religion)29 jackals: any of several nocturnal wild dogs of the genus canis.  They scavenge or hunt in packs.  A second meaning
is a person who performs dishonest deeds as a follower or accomplice.  A third meaning is a person who performs
menial or degrading tasks for another.30 blanched: turned pale31 allegiance: devotion or loyalty to a person, group or cause; the quality or state of being faithful; a pledge of loyalty to
a certain religion or cause.32 fasting: see Siddhartha’s comments later in his conversation with the merchant Kamaswami: "Very well and what
can you give?  What have you learned that you can give?" "I can think, I can wait, I can fast." "Is that all?" "I think that
is all." ."And of what use are they?  For example, fasting, what good is that?"  "It is of great value, sir.  If a man has
nothing to eat, fasting is the most intelligent thing he can do.  If, for instance, Siddhartha had not learned how to fast, he
would have had to seek some kind of work today, either with you, or elsewhere, for hunger would have driven him.
But as it is, Siddhartha can wait calmly.  He is not impatient, he is not in need, he can ward off hunger for a long time
and laugh at it.  Therefore, fasting is useful, sir."33 smarting: irritated, painful (cf. German “schmerzend”)34 heron: any of about sixty species of wading birds found throughout the world.  They are moderate to large in size
and have long, slender necks, legs, toes, and long, straight, dagger-like bills to grasp prey.  They also have short btails
and long, broad wings.  Both sexes are similar in coloration, some species are only white.  They have well-developed
powder downs and have elongated plumes on the head, necks, breasts, and back.  For food they generally wade in
shallow water, and are usually aggressive in capturing their prey.35 bamboo: any of a number of semitropical or tropical grasses often resembling trees, with perennial, jointed stems
that are woody, hard, springy, and often hollow and sometimes grow to a height of 120 ft.; the stems are used in light
construction and for furniture, canes, etc., and the young shoots of some are eaten.36 life cycle: Buddhists believe life is not linear (birth-life-death), but cyclical (birth-life-death-rebirth).  The whole goal
is to attain Nirvana and break free of the cycle of life.37 palliative: (Lat. palliare = to cloak) means of reducing the violence of a disease, causing it to lessen or abate, easing
it without curing.38 salvation: means rescue.  It is the achievement of a transcendental or eternal state, the deliverance of humankind
from sin or evil by religious means, also the liberation from ignorance and illusion by recognizing it.  In Buddhism, it is
thought to be the escape from the cycle of birth and rebirth, thus attaining nirvana by enlightenment.  It is the leaving of
material goods to save the spiritual being.  It is related to moksa and mukti which both derive from the root meaning "to
free".39 Nirvana: the word is Sanskrit for "extinguishing" as in "blowing out a candle" (nabbati -> "to cool by blowing").  As
such it is ultimately indescribable and non-debatable, as it can be know only directly.  It was applied in Kâla
philosophy before the advent of Buddhism, and has been much discussed in Western scholarship.  In the major forms
of Hinduism it is described metaphorically as the extinction of the flame of life; final emancipation; reunion with
Brahma (the Absolute) in ultimate release (Skt.moksa).  In all forms of Buddhism the dying out in the heart of the
threefold fire ("unwholesome roots") for lack of fuel: raga (passion, greed, lust), dosa (hatred), and moha (delusion,
false knowledge, ignorance).  This emancipation involves a beatific (serene) spiritual condition of bliss or "calm joy",
and freedom from the necessity of future transmigration, i.e. the endless cycle of rebirth (reincarnations).  There is no
arising, subsisting, changing, and passing away, no birth or death, no increase or decrease.  Nirvana is the state
corresponding to the highest form of enlightenment, liberation, and illumination and it frees the person from suffering,
death, and rebirth, and other worldly bonds.  It is the highest transcendent consciousness, the opposite of ignorance, in
which the known and knowledge become one, denoting the absence of anything different, distinct, or distinguishable
from itself.  It was a phase though beyond the pale of perfect freedom and transcendental bliss.  In this Nirvana there
were two elements, sunya and vijnana, the former implying non-existence or infinite energy or void (attained at death -
> Parinirvana), while the latter, vijnana, meant consciousness (before death).  Attaining Nirvana is the goal and
attainment of spiritual practice such as following the Eightfold Path in all branches of Buddhism, indeed all Indian
religion.  Some Buddhists interpret nirvana as one's innermost nature, not as an external goal.40 austere: severe or stern in disposition or appearance; somber and grave.  Strict or severe in discipline; ascetic.
Having no adornment or ornamentation; bare.  This deals with the samanas in the story in the way that they are very
somber, also Siddhartha’s attitude at the time when he is leaving his father.  To prove his devotion he does not move in
his place until his father gives him permission.
                                                                                                                                                                                      41 mockery: scornfully contemptuous ridicule, a false, derisive, or impudent imitation.42 Veda: Literally the Vedic Sanskrit word "veda" means “I know” (cf. Lat. "vidi", German "ich weiß").  The collective
noun Veda means divine knowledge, sacred book, sacred lore.  The plural Vedas can be used for one or all of the four
canonical collections.  The Vedas contain the basic Vedic Sanskrit scriptures of (Brahmanical) Hinduism, indeed the
oldest texts of Indian sacred literature.  They were passed down orally in a remarkably efficient mannner.  To these
collections were added expository works.  Appended were the Brahmanas (prayers), and the Aranyakas and the
classical Upanishads serving as works of exegesis, an epilogue or religio-philosophical conclusion.  The oldest portions
are believed to originated between 1300 and 1000 B.C., however, the Vedas in their present form are believed to date
only from close of the 3rd Century B.C.  Much advanced knowledge has been found in the later Vedas indicating an
advanced indigenous civilization, although the beginnings may coincide with the Aryan invasion of India.  The more
than 100 extant books are six times the bulk of the Bible.  Orthodox Hindus attribute superhuman origins and divine
authority to them.  They consist of four collections of hymns, detached poetical portions, and ceremonial formulas
(mantras).  They were revealed aurally to the sages whose names they bear.  The original and most important Veda is
Rig-Veda (life and health, a collection of more than 1000 hymns).  Then follow Sama-Veda (ritual and worship, often
with musical notation added), Yajur-Veda (sacrificial formulasin verse or prose), and the most modern Atharva-Veda
(hymns, magical incantations, magical spells, curses, exorcistic chants, and in a cruder style than the preceding).  The
four basic texts are also known as the Vedic Samhita.43 venerable: one who commands respect because of great age or dignity with historical and religious connotations.
44 Gotama (Gautama) is the surname of the S(h)akya clan and the name of the historical Buddha by which non-
Buddhist contemporaries called him in order to distinguish him from other Buddhas.  The legend of Gotama is as
follows: he was a member of the S(h)akya tribe which lived in the Himalayan foothills and in the swampy lowlands
north of the Ganges (Terai)and belonged to the subjects of the hostile Kos(h)alan king.  Gotama was the son of
Suddhodana, ruler of Kipalavatthir, and his mother was Maha Maya.  He was of the Gotama Klan (gotra), his name
being Sidattha.  While he was still in his mother's womb (the day he was born) she had a dream that she was carried to
the Himalayas where she was bathed by the wives of the gods and then dressed in the clothes of the goddesses.  Then
she lay on a couch where the Buddha-to-be entered her body in the form of a white elephant.  Thus his birth could be
described as parthogenetic (virgin birth).  Maha Maya delivered the child from her right side while standing upright
holding on to a tree in Lumfini Garden (sala grove) and died a seven days after his birth as is the tradition for mothers
of Buddhas.  Her sister Maha Prajapati Gotami married the king and brought up Siddhartha.  Maha Maya was reborn in
the place where, after Buddha’s enlightenment, he went to teach her the Dharma.  Gotama Siddhartha lived an easy life.
At 29 or 30 he went for a ride in the royal park and saw four signs that were to decide his career: an aged man, a sick
man, a corpse, and a wandering religious mendicant.  He recognized in the first three signs the presence of suffering in
the world, and, in the serenity of the mendicant, he saw the virtues of an ascetic life and his destiny.  He renounced his
life of luxury, left the royal palace, forsook his wife, Yashodhara and infant son, Rahula, and adopted the ascetic life,
wandering for six years and suffering extreme self-mortification..  Gotama studied with two teachers, leaving each in
turn when he felt that their doctrines were inadequate.  One day he sat down under a pipal tree at Bodh Gaya
determined not to leave his seat until the riddle of human misery was solved.  The Bodhisatva withstood the
temptations and torments cast by Mara, the Evil One, and on the 49th day, he was rewarded for his holy asceticism by
“the great enlightenment” or Nirvana.  He became ateacher, gathered disciples, who were the first Buddhist monks and
spread the results of his vision abroad.  The Buddha preached his first sermon in the Deer Park at Sarnath, near
Benares.  He returned home briefly where he converted his father, wife, and son.  His cousin Devadatta, jealous of
Buddha, tried to kill him by driving a wild elephant in his path, but the Buddha calmed the animal with gentleness.  For
45 years the Buddha traveled and preached his ministry and in time he came to be called Bhagavan, Tathagata, and the
Buddha.  Early represntations of the Buddha often took the form of an empty throne, a pair of footprints, a wheel, or a
pipal tree, symbols of his having attained Nirvana and having left the world.  The Gandhara and Mathura schools of art
which flourished in the 1st and 2nd century A.D. and which were much influenced by Greek ideas, produced the first
image of Buddha.
Interest in Gotama's life did not develop until around 200 BC, and by then had to rely mostly on accounts passed down
by oral tradition making the biographical data quite uncertain.  Some accounts have him live 100 years, others 200.45 Buddha: the Sanskrit word means "awakened" (to the truth), "enlightened."  The Japanese use the word "butsu".  It
is a honorific title applied to a wise person or sage, a fully enlightened individual who has achieved perfect knowledge
of the truth thus breaking the cycle of existence and reaching Nirvana.  Reportedly there were six Buddhas preceding
Gotama, and since then he has not been the last.  Because of the three-body doctrine, the buddha-nature can manifest
itself in accessible form, so there have been many transcendent Buddhas.  But the term "Buddha" is most often used to
                                                                                                                                                                                      
refer to Gotama more than any other.  The perfect knowledge, made known by a Buddha, eventually becomes lost to
the world, and then has to wait for the emergence of a new Buddha in order to be known and proclaimed again.  A
being who is enlightened and discovers truth, and is thus a Buddha, and who does not proclaim it, is an isolated,
'private' (non-teaching) Buddha (pratyeka), as compared to the teaching Buddha (samyak Buddha) who expounds his
teaching for the welfare of all.  Related to the concept of Buddha is Bodhisattva, the state of being which precedes the
final state of Buddhahood.  After the final state is reached, the Buddha endures as long as his physical life lasts, then he
has no further relations with the world of space and time.
As stated above (cf.Gotama), the word Buddha is most often applied to Siddhartha Gotama, the historical founder of
Buddhism, who was born in Kapilavastu, India, north of Benares and just inside present-day Nepal and who probably
lived 563-483 BC.  He was the son of the Rajah (princely head of lower nobility) of the Sakya tribe and warrior caste,
with the given name of Siddhartha; in later life he was also known as S(h)akyamuni.  Hesse used this name as well as
Gautama and Buddha interchangeably.  He spent his youth in great luxury.
Gotama Siddhartha left his wife and son Rahula (cf. Hesse's Siddhartha) to experience extreme asceticism and
wandered as a mendicant over northern India. He first investigated Hinduism.  He took instruction from some famous
Brahman teachers, but he found the Hindu caste system repellent and Hindu asceticism futile in that it did not lead to
the escape from suffering and death.  He continued his search, attracting but later losing five followers.  Disillusioned
he reverted to "the middle way" which is now known as Buddhism.  At age 36, in Buddh Gaya, in what is now the state
of Bihar, while sitting under a Bo tree (Skr. bodhi -> light; ficus religiosa -> tree of enlightenment) and concentrating
on things as they really are, Buddha passed through the four stages of insight and reached the great enlightenment,
which revealed the way of salvation from suffering.  By giving out the Four Noble Truths, the primary and fundamental
doctrines of Sakyamuni, he answered man's question for the reasons of suffering.  He taught that people's suffering was
of their own making, and that the focusing of desire on the material and ephemeral caused all despair, hatred, and
competition.  This is why "man found himself living in the realm of death - the realm of physical being …" The truth
he found was that humans are like lotuses in a pool: all rooted in mud, most swamped below the surface, a few
struggling to the light and some already blossomed.  Coming approximately 500 years before Christ, the Buddha was a
manifestation of the wisdom aspect of God, just as Christ is the embodiment of the love aspect.  Gotama had a career of
traveling widely in the Ganges valley, making disciples, and preaching his Dharma for 40-45 years.  He died in
Kusinagara, Nepal at age 80.
Buddha was one of the greatest human beings, a man of noble character, penetrating vision, warm compassion, and
profound thought.  Not only did he establish a great religion, but his revolt against Hindu hedonism, asceticism,
extreme spiritualism, and the caste system deeply influenced Hinduism itself.  His rejection of metaphysical
speculation and his logical thinking introduced an important scientific strain heretofore lacking in Oriental thought.  In
Hinduism, the Buddha is considered ninth in the standard list of Vishnu's incarnations (avatars) the purpose of whose
manifestation was to abolish sacrifices, out of compassion for animals.  Buddha's teachings have influenced the lives of
billions of people for nearly 2500 years.46 See #5247 Sakya (Shakya): derived or descended from the Sâkas, from whom the historical Buddha came, whence his honorific
Sakymuni, “Sage of the Sakyas.”  As the major migration of the Sâkas and Parthians (Indoeuropeans, Mongolians?) to
India does not appear to have taken place before the fourth century B.C., the establishment of a tribe of the Sâkas in
north-eastern India would seem to have been one of the minor infiltrations from the Caucasus in the later part of the
second millennium B.C. Their form of government was that by an assembly of elders.  Many people of the Sakya tribe
followed the Buddha after his enlightenment.48 Mortification (of the flesh): penitential discipline of the body and control over the appetites by self-denial or self-
inflicted privation, the killing through ascetic practices of unruly or disordered appetites and desire for sin which
militate against spiritual advance.  In the Christian religion it means “to put to death what is earthly in you: fornication,
impurity, passion, desire and covetousness.”  And: “If by the spirit you put to death the habits originating in the body,
you will have life.” (Rom 8.13)  In essence: the ascetics are working to make themselves free of sin through self-
inflicted torture.  Unlike Christians who feel there is a connection between “mortification” and the crucifixion of
Christ, Buddhists follow a different form of discipline.  They believe there is a transformative effect aiding in the
transition from a life devoted to gratification of desires of the body to a higher, sanctified life in the spirit through
ascetic resistance.  The term is also applied to ascetic rigour in other religions.  Medically it can be applied to death or
decay of one part of a living body -> gangrene, necrosis.
                                                                                                                                                                                      49 Sakyamuni (Shakyamuni):  The author or reviver of Buddhism, whose birth appears to have occurred in the seventh,
and death in the sixth century before Christ.  He was the son of Suddhodama, king of Kapila-Vastu (Kapilavatthu) or of
Magadha.  He was also called Sakyasimha (“lion of the Sakyas”).  The epithet probably originated in Tibet.  It was
applied to Gotama Siddhartha after he separated himself from his teachers and went to find enlightenment himself.  The
word “muni” means capability and kindness and refers to a sage.50 Magadha: one of the four great kingdoms (i.e. Magadha, Kosala, Vansa, and Avanti) in ancient (5th century B.C.)
India, and one of the sixteen N.Indian states (Mahajanapadas) mentioned in Buddhist sources which consider it the
region in which Buddhism (as well as Jainism) had its birth.  The region is first found in the Rig-Veda and later in the
Atharva-Veda.  After the 3rd Buddhist Council, Buddhism spread to other parts of India.  At the time of the Buddha,
Magadha was flanked on the east by the river Campa, the west by the river Sone, on the north by the Ganges, and on
the south by the Vindhyas.  It was the central power of India from the 6th century B.C. to the 6th century A.D. (at the
decline of the Gupta dynasty) and covers what is now roughly the districts of Patha and Gaya in the South of the state
of Bihar.  Nalanda, a city in Magadha, became a famous seat of Buddhist learning.  The capital of Magadha was
Rajagaha (Rajagriha) and then Pataliputra.  Magadha rose to a position of dominance under its first great king,
Bimb(l)isara, who became the follower of Sakyamuni.  He was the one who built Bamboo Grove Park in Rajagaha, the
first Bodhi mandala in Buddhism.  During early Buddhist times, Magadha was a center of trade and was thronged with
numerous people, who also came to study.  Its corn fields were luxuriant and fertile and its people prosperous.  The
town was known for the grace and beauty of its women and for its magnificent singers (minstrels).  By the 4th century
B.C. Magadha included most of northern India.  Falling briefly under the sway of Alexander the Great and his
Macedonian successors, it was conquered in 321 B.C. by Chandragupta, who made it the center of his Mauryan
Empire.  Later it fell to the Muslims and became a mere province of the Delhi sultanate.  Mâgadhi is also known as the
ancient Indian language (Prakrit, Pali), its most widespread script being Brahmi, which was thought to have been used
as the main language to spread Buddhism.  The Buddha, on the other hand, spent most of his life outside of Magadha.51 hypnotize: put in a state of hypnosis (Gr. hypnos -> sleep), a sleeplike state usually induced psychically by another
in which the subject loses consciousness but responds, with certain limitations, to the suggestions of the hypnotist.52 Savathi (Savatthi, Srâvasti, Shrâvasti): has been identified with Sahet-Mahet on the Rapti, the capital of the ancient
Kingdom of Kosala.  Its name has been traced to two traditions: one on account of the alleged existence of a sage,
Savathha, who lived there.  Its name has developed in course of time as one of the six great cities in northern India
during the Buddha’s life-time.  Its importance must have been mainly commercial, although its religious association
from the Buddhist perspective cannot also be ignored, as it lay on the trade-route from Rajagirha to Pratisthana.  The
Buddha spent as a monk, the major part of his life in this city and went there first at the invitation of the liberal-minded
philanthropist Anathapindaka.  The Buddha was patronized in this city also by Visakha, Suppavasa and Pasenadi.
Savathi became a very lavish religious center  where the famous Buddhist monastery Bodhimandala (Jetavana Grove)
was located.53 alms bowls: bowls held up by the samanas for gifts of food.  Alms giving is part of the general ethical practice built
into Buddhist life.  What counts is the intention and unselfishness of the act, although in actual practice it may be done
to earn devine merit for the donor.  Alms can be gifts of food, money, clothing.  As a duty to give to the poor, alms
played a significant role in biblical culture.  These obligations were derived from the rise of a large poor class during
the Greek era.  Alms served to maintain community relations and loyalty.54 Jetavana Grove, a grove on the southern outskirts of Srâvasti, the capital city of Kosala, often frequented by the
Buddha.  The Buddha is often described as residing there, in particular during nineteen rainy seasons.  The grove was
donated to the Sangha (order, community of monks) by the wealthy merchant Anathapindika who paid its owner,
Prince Jeta, enough gold to cover the ground.  Prince Jeta had specially laid out the garden for the stay of the Buddha
and built the houses for the Buddha and his followers.  It became the famous monastery Bodhimandala of Sakyamuni, a
“vihara” where Bhiksus (monks) and Bhiksunis (nuns) practice and teach the Buddhist Dharma (Skr."law").  It became
the model for the oldest monastery in China.  Jetavanavama is the mightiest temple of its kind on earth.  It was
originally more than 400 feet high, and the crystal finial of its modern restoration glitters 500 feet above the beholder.
Its base, 370 feet in diameter, stands upon a brick foundation 26 feet in thickness, which in turn rests on a raft of
concrete.  The entire structure occupies eight acres of land.  It is larger than all but two of the pyramids.55 Anathapindika (“who gives to the needy”), Buddha’s most renowned lay followers, was a wealthy merchant in
Srâvasti who built the monastery for him in the Jetavana Grove at great expense.  His actual name was Sudatta.56 to sojourn: to stay or reside temporarily, for instance during a pilgrimage.57 monks: (or bikkhus), third of the  "Three Jewels" of Buddhism, forming a sangha which is translated as assembly
(order).  Monks are the followers of the Buddha who leave behind their household and family to become wandering
almsmen.  They are allowed to possess only a minimum of personal belongings: robes, alms bowl, needle, rosary,
                                                                                                                                                                                      
razor, filter for water.  This is an outward sign of dedication to the religious life.  The code of discipline by which they
live is found in the Patimokkha.   In Buddhism, monasticism arises naturally from the Indian tradition of the homeless
wanderer as a private option which develops into an institution.  It lies at the heart of religion, and taking refuge in a
group of monks is one of the Three Jewels.  Sakyamuni Buddha is the model monk, having composed the monastic
regulations.  The monks practice renunciation, a mild form of asceticism, in which clothing is worn, hair and beard are
shaved and general cleanliness practiced..  From the beginning, women have been accepted as nuns, just as Kamala is
accepted into Gotama’s followers.  The original habit was made from aged yellow cloth.  The original humble shelters
of monks have developed into large walled cities resembling universities.58 yellow cowl: the yellow suit worn by the monks in the story.  It is a hooded cloak worn by monks, usually the same
color as the habit of the order of the wearer.59 countenance: (from Lat. “holding together”) bearing, demeanor.60 The Eightfold Path (Astangika-marga) is a doctrine taught by Gotama Buddha in his first sermon at the deer park
near Benares in India.  It provides a way for people to free themselves from desire and overcome misery of life and to
find release from dukkha (transience, suffering) and the suffering involved in it.  It is not seen in early Buddhist
writings, and is believed to have been derived from the original threefold path.  Its contents are the last of the Four
Noble Truths, and one of the thirty-seven “limbs” of enlightenment.  Together with the Four Noble Truths, it sums up
the whole of Buddhist teaching.  The Eightfold Path is also called the Middle Paths, as it steers a course between the
sensual pleasures of the materialists and the self-mortification of the ascetics.  The path does not necessarily consist of
sequential steps (since the perfect ways of behavior ( cf. 3-5) precede all else).  The path is listed as follows: (1)
perfected view which understands the Four Noble Truths and their dependence on no persistent substantiality, (2)
perfected resolution in the direction of non-attachment (perfect aspiration avoiding desires and ill will), (3) perfected
speech free from malice, gossip, idle talk, lies, slander, abuse and harsh words etc., (4) perfected conduct or action,
respect for life (do not kill), property (do not steal), and personal relationship (no sexual misconduct), (5) perfected
livelihood, avoiding work which harms others, abstaining from any of the forbidden modes of living such astrading in
animals for slaughter, dealing in weapons, dealing in slaves, dealing in poison and dealing in intoxicants, (6) perfected
endeavor (zeal, progress) in setting forward that which produces good karma, unintermitted perseverance, suppressing
the rise of evil states and stimulating good states, and to perfect those which have come to beings, (7) perfected
mindfulness, right memory, avoiding distracted and clouded state of mind, awareness, and being self-possessed, (8)
perfected concentration, right abstraction, meditation, focusing the mind without distraction, preparing the mind to
attain wisdom.  Systematically, the paths can be divided into three sections.  (A) Morality (shila) includes right speech,
right conduct, and right livelihood.  (B) Mental discipline (samadhi) consists of right effort, right mindfulness, and right
concentration (bringing the mind to a single, stable point).  (C) Intuitive insight or wisdom (prajna) is wisdom that
involves grasping the reality beneath the surface of things.  In everyday life, the Eightfold Path requires that the
individual do no harm to any creature.  Also forbidden are theft, falsehood, unchastity, strong drink, and the taking of
the life.  The ultimate goal is to find Nirvana, or Elightenment.  Some Buddhist teachings have held that to enter this
path in itself implies an experience of Nirvana.  The Eightfold Path exists on two levels, the ordinary path and the holy
path.  Most people seek to achieve the ordinary path.61 pilgrimage: a round-trip journey taken by those who consider their destination sacred.  A prilgrimage is a religious
custom that involves three factors, a holy place, an attraction of individuals or crowds to that holy place, a specific aim
for example, to obtain some spiritual or material benefit, transitory as this may be.  Besides hope of spiritual benefits or
healing, pilgrimage often held social attractions, they generally brought material advantages to places concerned with
pilgrimage shrines.  These shrines became rich with the offerings of the pilgrims, and economic benefits extended to
many persons.  In Hinduism, there are both an interior and exterior pilgrimage.  The interior refers to  to the visits to the
seven sacred cities during meditation, while the exterior pilgrimage is characterized by the obvious constant movement
to the seven cities.  Buddhist pilgrimages are common especially to sites holding relics and places associated with
Buddha.  Destinations of importance: Kandy, which holds Buddha’s tooth, Buddha’s birthplace, sites of his first
sermon and enlightenment, Buddha’s footprint, sites growing cuttings from the Bo Tree under which Buddha attained
enlightenment.  In general, a pilgrimage is the movement to a condition or place of holiness or healing.  It may be
interior or exterior.  In Buddhism it is exterior.62 enlightenment: a coming to awareness and realization of the truth after being ignorant and unaware of it.  Buddha
was enlightened because his knowledge and experience crystallized, revealing to him the existential and theoretical
meaning of life.  In Buddhism enlightenment is achieved by following the eightfold pass.  Enlightenment is repeatedly
misunderstood as an experience of light, and experiences of light are mistaken for "enlightenment," the English word
having been derived from Christian mysticism.  Because of this, the more preferred term is awakening.  Achieving
enlightenment can only be attained by a person awakening to a "nowness of emptiness" which he himself is - as the
                                                                                                                                                                                      
entire universe is emptiness - this alone enables a person to comprehend the true nature of things.  Buddhism is based
on and centered around  achieving  this experience, without enlightenment there would be no Buddhism.  Although
enlightenment by its nature is always "the same," there are many different degrees of the experience.  The differences
in clarity and accuracy of insight are huge, even though the same world is seen in both cases.  In Christian mysticism in
the Middle Ages, enlightenment preceded the mystical union with God.  In 18th century Europe, the term acquired a
new secular meaning (Aufklärung) when it was used to describe a lively questioning of authority, keen interest in
matters of politics and general culture, and an emphasis on the empirical method in science.63 imperturbable: marked by extreme calm, impassivity and steadiness; a tranquil state of self control, a state
possessed by those with a religious inner peace or calmness.64 The Divine: (aka deva = celestial power).  It is a term for all Vedic gods.  Believed to have originated from the union
of heaven and earth , but later they were thought to have come from Prajapati.  The Divine are immortal in a
provisional sense, keeping death at bay through the sacrifices offered to them.  Deva is also used to describe
enlightened people who have had direct experiences of the Divine.  In Buddhism, the soul (or spirit) of the human is the
product of conditions and causes.  Buddhism does not conceive of the soul as ultimately real; it parts company with the
Hindu and Jain concept of the soul as identical with the divine self (Atman).  The soul is more essential to a person’s
identity than his body, which is made from clay and is but a possession, something one has rather than what one is.65 The Absolute: perfect; complete; whole; not mixed; pure.  In philosophy: ultimate reality regarded as uncaused,
unmodified, unified and complete, timeless etc.66 Yoga: (Skt. = union) general term for spiritual disciplines, followed for centuries by devotees of both Hinduism and
Buddhism, to attain higher consciousness and liberation from ignorance, suffering, and rebirth.  It is one of the six
orthodox systems of Indian philosophy resting on a metaphysical dualism that exists between the ultimates of prakriti
and purusha whose contact produces the phenomenal world and whose disentangling  represents the process of
individual salvation, but with the exception that yoga assumes the existence of God who is the model for aspirants
seeking spiritual release.  Yoga holds with Samhya that the achievement of spiritual liberation occurs when the self is
freed from the bondage of matter that have resulted because of ignorance and illusion.  The practical aspects of yoga
play a more important part than does its intellectual content which is largely based on the philosophy of Samkhya (Skr.
-> based on calculation, philosophical method).  It is the technique for transforming consciousness and attaining
liberation from rebirth.  The mind is thought to be in continual fluctuation, but through yoga may be focused and a
higher state of consciousness experienced.  In the Upanishads yoga is described as comprising the six stages of breath
control, sense withdrawal, meditation, concentration, contemplative inquiry, and absorption.  The evidence of its Vedic
influence is the documentation of tapas, a means of releasing the self and an inner sacrifice of breath, in the Rig-Veda.
Raja yoga (royal yoga) was expounded by Patanjali (2nd century B.C.), who divided the practice into eight stages, the
heighest of which is samadhi, or identification of the individual consciousness with the Godhead.  Hindu tradition in
general recognizes three main types of yoga: jnana yoga, the path of wisdom and discernment; bhakti yoga, the path of
love and devotion to a personal god; and karma yoga, the path of selfless action.  Hatha yoga, widely practiced in the
West, emphasizes physical control and posture.  Kundalini yoga, associated with tantra, is based on the physiology of
the “subtle body.”  It attempts to open centers of psychic energy called chakras, said to be located along the spinal
column, and to activate the kundalini, a force located at the base of the spine.  Yoga is usually practiced under the
guidance of a guru, or spiritual teacher.  Contemporary systems of yoga stress attaining spiritual realization without
withdrawing from the world, as the older tradition taught.67 Atharva-Veda: means “the Veda of the Atharvan” or knowledge of magic formulas.  This word, originally dating
back to the Indio-Iranian  period literally means “fire priest.”  Atharva-Veda is the forth section of the Vedas and
contains material that may be as old as the first section (731 hymns), the Rig-Veda, although most is later than other
portions of Veda.  Atharva-Veda contains hymns to the gods of the Vedic pantheon and magical spells and incantations
for disease curing, rain, material prosperity, and subduing enemies..  Atharva Veda is similar to yoga.  It describes an
Aryan group (an Indoeuropean-speaking people) called the Vratyas who practiced austerities and breathing exercises
suggestive of yogic control.  It also desccribes Brahman.  As a collection of hymns, magic spells, and incantations it
represented a more popular (cruder) level of religion and remained partly outside the Vedic sacrificial tradition. . It was
not strictly fixed in content , so a series of brief Upanishads was appended to it.  It usually represents textbooks for later
schools of Hinduism.  It is also the oldest book of Indian medicine.68 Mara: (Skr. for death, murder, destruction, the killer) the Buddhist “Lord of the Senses”, also the “Evil One”, or:
“Namuci” (the tempter), parallel to the devil in Western religion.  In Hindu Mara is the god of pestilence and mortal
disease, the attraction of sensual pleasure which makes human action reckless.  Mara is regarded as a demonic being
who is arch-enemy of all who seek to live the holy life, and the main opponent of the Buddha and his religion.  Mara,
Lord of the Sixth Heaven of Kamaloka (the world of desire), is often depicted with a hundred arms riding an elephant.
                                                                                                                                                                                      
According to Buddha “there is no power so hard to subdue as the power of Mara.”  Mara tries to block Buddhists from
transcending his realm by achieving enlightenment.  Mara disturbs the efforts of prayer and meditation, as well as
trying to lead celibate monks and nuns astray.  As legend goes, the evil Mara appeared in the guise of a messenger to
the Buddha who was waiting for enlightenment under the Bo tree.  He brought the news that a rival, Devadatta, had
usurped the Sakya throne from Gotama’s family.  Next Mara sent forth a great storm of rain, rocks, ashes, and
darkness, frightening away all the gods who had gathered to honor the future Buddha.  He challenged Gotama’s right to
sit beneath the tree, provoking the future Buddha to call upon the earth to give witness to his previous charities.  Mara
sent forth his three daughters, Trsna, Rati, and Raga (thirst, desire, delight), to seduce Gotama, but to no avail.  After
Buddha had achieved supreme enlightenment, he experienced doubt as to whether the truth could be understood by
men, and Mara pressed him to abandon any attempt to preach.  But when the gods implored him to preach the law, the
Buddha put aside his doubts.  Mara may assume human or animal forms as disguise but he is unable to effect any evil
purpose against Buddha who sees through his disguise.  He is also the symbol for anything likely to keep one under the
spell of material existence (samsara). (The Harper Collins Dictionary of Religion)69 (Veil of) Maya: in early Vedic literature it is an extraphysical, wonder-working power.  It is the power to bring
things into apparent form, to make the spirit/soul into a human physical form.  Maya in Sanskrit means an illusion,
deception, appearance, or magic like one produced by a magician.  It is the powerful force that creates the cosmic
illusion that the phenomenal world is real.  This comes down to the broad statement: "Maya is God's creative energy."
Maya draws a veil over brahman and veils our vision, so we see only the diversity of the universe rather than the one
reality.  It is a force that eternally and inseparably coexists with the Brahman.  Together Maya and Brahman form
Ishvara.  Ishvara is the personal God who creates, upholds, and destroys the universe.  Maya has two aspects, one of
ignorance (avidya) and one of knowledge (vidya).  Avidya leads a man away from God and toward worldliness and
materialism which turns to passion and greed.  Vidya, the knowledgeable aspect, leads to God-realization and finds
expression in spiritual virtues.  Humans trascend avidya and vidya by realizing Brahman, the Absolute.  There is a
mahayana (Skrt. maha => grand, yana => ferry) school which believes the world is an illusion (maya) and that dharmas
(laws, teachings) are conditioned and have no being themselves.  Among Sikhs, maya is the real part of God’s creation;
preoccupation with maya leads to separation from God and continual rebirth.70 sickle: it is actually a curved blade mounted on a handle, for cutting grass etc.  This image is beautiful because we
imagine a sickle blade cutting through dark ocean waters (the sky).  But also there is a sense of tranquility because of
the word “floating.”71 ostracized: banished; excluded from common privileges or socail acceptance by common consent or popular vote
(without trial or special accusation, as practiced in ancient Greece; basically, Siddhartha was shutting out nature and
beauty because he did not think that it pertained to Atman.72 pike: any of several large, slender, voracious freshwater game and food fishes of the genus esox lucius, having a
long, flat snout and attaining a length of over four feet.73 erudition: profound, recondite, or bookish learning; extensive knowledge acquired by study, research, etc. chiefly
from books; learning, scholarhsip.74 tarry: to remain or stay, as in a place; to delay or be tardy in acting, starting, or coming.75 Bo tree: The sacred Bo Tree is grown from a sapling of the tree under which the Buddha attained enlightenment.  It
is the oldest living tree in documented history.  In its vicinity are the remains of the Brazen Palace, the towering
Riwanreliseya Dagaba, the seated Buddha, temples, palaces and parks – all of which bear testimony to a proud and
imaginative people.  A mere eight miles away is Mihintale – the cradle of Buddhism in Sri Lanka.  It is a mountain
monastery connected with Arahat Mahinda who brought Buddhism to the Island in 247 B.C.76 benediction: an utterance of good wishes.  The form of blessing briefly pronounced by an officiating minister as at a
close of divine service; coming from the Latin verb benedicere (to bless, to speak well of), it is considered something
that promotes goodness or well-being.77 sedan chair: a portable enclosed seat for one person, carried on poles by two or four bearers.  It was popular in
Europe in the 17th, 18th, and early 19th centuries, having been used in the Far East for milennia.78 Kamala: a name, but it refers to kama.  Kama is sensual desire or erotic love in Sanskrit, longing, and sexual
pleasure, occasionally applied to longing in general.  The Rig-Veda represents desire as the first movement towards
manifestation of the Absolute, the primal germ of mind, the creative impulse.  In Buddhism, kama is seen as one of the
primary obstacles on the spiritual path and a major obstacle to progress toward enlightenment.  Kama belongs to the
lowest of the three domains (triloka), the domain of desire (kamaloka).  The five types of sensual desire are: desire
toward form, sound, smell, taste, and bodily feeling.  Of the Four Noble Truths in Buddhism, the second refers to
elucidating cravings, specifically the craving for sensual pleasures.  It is also listed as one of the “impurities” in
Buddhism and one of the five hinderances in meditation training.  Kama acts as desire through creative energy in the
                                                                                                                                                                                      
Atharva-Veda; it is first to be born.  In mythology, Kama shot the ascetic god Shiva with the arrow of fascination so
that he decided to marry Parvati and rid himself of desire.  Kama is burnt to ashes by Shiva’s powers of asceticism.
Kamala is also a name of Lakshmi.79 courtesan: (originally: woman courtier) a prostitute, paramour, kept woman often with a clientele drawn from a
court or from the wealthy or the upper class.80 Vishnu: “he who acts or pervades,” in Hinduism, is the pervading projector of the universe.  Pervading in this sense
means that he assumed many different forms.  He appears first in the Rig-Veda, but not as major deity.  A few Rig-
vedic hymns associate him with the sun and relate the always popular legend of his three strides across the universe.
He turned out to be one of the three great Gods of Hinduism, the second in the triad (Trimurti), manifesting the cosmic
functions of the Supreme Being.  The others are Brahma and Shiva.  Vishnu alternates with, or appears in
reincarnations (avitars) as Brahma and Shiva, and acts as the supreme deity and preserver of the balance among all
three.  He appears as a majestic figure, the Godhead at peace, propitious, and often anthropomorphic.  A solar and
cosmic deity, he is God of the ocean and of the luminous sky, the protector and sustainer of the world.  He is known as
the All-pervader, being the cohesive, centripetal constructive power of the universe.  He is the embodiment of goodness
and mercy and is believed to have assumed visible form in nine descents: three in non-human form, one in hybrid form,
and five in human form.  In temples he is often depicted as an elephant-faced multiarmed man, or in a 4-armed human
form standing, reclining, or sitting.  A right arm is holding a discus (Skr.chakra), a reminder of the wheel of time and to
lead a good life, and a left arm holds a conch shell (Skr.sankha) indicating the spread of the divine sound “Om”,
symbolizing water, emancipation from time, and justice.  One more hand holds a lotus (padma) which is an example of
glorious existence, and the fourth hand a mace (matya) indicating the power and the punishing  capacity of the Lord if
discipline in life is ignored.  In his syncretic human form, his most important appearances were those of Rama, the hero
of the epic Ramayana, and Krishna, hero of the Bhagavad Gita.  His followers, called Vaishnavites (cf. Vaishnavism),
consider him the ultimate god, the others being only aspects of him, and repeat his 1000 names” as an act of devotion.
Vaishnavism is one of the three great forms of theistic worship in Hinduism.  Vishnu is usually depicted with dark skin,
which represents the passive and formless ether, a great quality for a pervading god.  He is either standing, holding
weapons, riding on the swift-flying bird Garuda, which can spread the Vedic knowledge with great courage, or
reclining on the powerful, coiled serpent Sheshanag who represents the sleeping universe.  Vishnu and is sometimes
worshipped by a small stone called salagrama.  He is also known as Hari (the remover) and worshipped primarily in
the Ganges area.  His female consort is Lakshmi, goddess of well-being.81 Lakshmi: (Laksmi, Laxmi => "fortune") In Hinduism, the goddess of wealth, a kindly and gracious being, and later
in her history the consort of the great deity Vishnu, sometimes called the “Lotus Goddess”, associated with Dewali
(Skr. “row of lights, also: Divali), the new year festival of lights in October, when people light lamps for her and leave
their doors open to allow her to enter.  She seems to embody the miraculous vitality of vegetation.  She is also the
goddess (and model) of beauty, sometimes with four arms, but often portrayed with only two arms (for the sake of
beauty).  She is also known as S(h)ri (Skr. fortunate, glorious, holy, reverend - commonly used in speaking of a person,
king, or divinity, with special respect, as in Sri Krishna.)  The letters of this alternative title of hers are written on walls,
books, and papers to ensure good fortune.  In the most widely received account of Lakshmi’s birth, she sprang from the
milky ocean seated on a lotus and holding another blossom in her hand when the gods churned it for the nectar of
immortality.  Conroversy arose between the gods and demons over possession of her.  She is sometimes conceived of
as being the embodiment of the Lord’s mercy.  While Vishnu is in the role of the heavenly king, she represents the
bounty, order and fertility brought into being by his just cosmic rule.  She is embodied as Radha, Padma (Kamala),
Dharani, and Sita, but plays only a secondary role in the Hindu scriptures.  Lakshmi is said to have taken different
forms in order to be with Vishnu in each of his incarnations.  Thus when he was the dwarf Vamana, she appeared from
a lotus and was known as Padma or Kamala; when he was the ax-wielding Parashurama, the destroyer of the warrior
caste, she is his wife of Dharani; when he was King Rama, she was his queen Sita.  In modern Hinduism Lakshmi
continues to be very popular among businessmen and merchants, who believe material prosperity can't be found
without her presence and and blessing.  She is worshipped in the home and on regular festival days throughout the year.
She is greatly revered by members of the Jainist faith.82 Lotus flower: a plant of the water lily family;  in Buddhism, the lotus is a symbol of the true nature of beings which
remains unstained by the mud of the world (samsara and ignorance).  It is also a symbol of the world with the stem as
its axis.  As an icon, it is a form of the seat or throne of Buddha.  It is also considered a symbol of beauty and
sacredness, yet one of unattachment as well since it floats on the water, yet remains dry.83 incantation: (cf. Lat. cano -> I sing, sound, chant) can mean the uttering, singing, or chanting of words, meaningless
to outsiders, having to do with magical powers.  It is usually associated with magical spells or charms in ceremonies.
Its meaning differs from one culture to another.  Overall it is understood as the authorized use of rhythmically
                                                                                                                                                                                      
organized words of power that are chnated, spoken or written to accomplish a desired goal by binding spiritual powers
to act in a favorable way.  The practice is related to other uses of sacred language, such as prayer, invocation, blessing
and cursing.  Verbal formulas associated with incantation are designed to perform the desired result by "obliging"
spiritual powers.84 Kamaswami: Siddhartha’s mentor.  The name is a combination of the Sanskrit words kama and swami.  Swami
means “owner” or “master” and is the Indic title of respect for a religious teacher or member of an ascetic order.  Since
kama is used to mean a distraction or obstacle from achieving enlightenment, Kamaswami, the merchant, is a
distraction to Siddhartha’s search for enlightenment, as Siddhartha learns from him to appreciate material possessions.
Kamaswami teaches him the way of the merchant; the business and economics of it.  Siddhartha learns quickly, but will
always carry a sense of himself in his transactions.  He is not overly self-confident the way Kamaswami is.  He is
friendly to the people and hospitable to the children.  Although he is grateful to his teachers Kamaswami, he can never
be exactly like him.85 satiation: being satisfied of one’s appetites or desires, to the point of boredom.86 inertia: inactivity, sluggishness; tendency to maintain a straight line.87 covet(ousness): to desire wrongfully, inordinately, or without due regard for the rights of others; greed.  Siddhartha
uses this term to describe the type of person he has become, and how he hates it.  He used to be hospitable and
generous, now he is after the riches – gambling his self away and loving it.88 declivity: sloping down; here: road downhill89 tepid: barely or moderately warm; lukewarm; lacking warmth of feeling or enthusiasm.90 exaltation: rapturous excitement and stimulation to greater activity.91 Samsara: or “flowing together” is the central conception of metempsychosis, transmigration of souls from body to
body; in the Hinduist and Buddhist idea of rebirth, Samsara comes to mean the cycle of perpetual existences, that is
birth, death, and rebirth in eternal repetition.  It refers in Hinduism and Jainism to the career of the soul, which, once it
has fallen from its original state of self-consciousness and bliss, is born as any creature and continues to be reborn until
it has found release from the bonds of its past deeds.  It is the manifestation of karma , for one’s meritorious or
demeritorious deeds bear fruition in the timing, status, form, and nature of the phenomenal person in future lives.  The
deity can break the cycle, adjust it, or, by the god’s kindness or grace, save one from future births regardless of one’s
actions.  Buddhism, which does not assume the existence of a permanent soul, accepts a semipermanent personality
core that goes through the process of Samsara.  The range of Samsara stretches from the lowliest insect to Brahma, the
highest of the gods, for they also are involved in transmigration.  Samsara describes the universe which has eternally
existed, it has no ultimate “creation” or final “destruction.”  In Sanskrit, Samsara means “going through” or
"journeying" or “running around” where the soul travels through a series of earthly lives.  Rebirth is an endless chain
according to one’s “karmic” behavior.  According to the Buddha, the nature of this continual cycle should not be
dwelled upon or speculated about, which is futile, but instead an antidote found, an escape (Skr. moksha [release] ->
salvation from the bondage of finite existence) from the suffering of endless returns (dukkha), primarily in terms of
reaching Nirvana.  Imprisonment in Samsara has three roots: (1) hatred, (2) desire (craving), and (3) delusion.  Every
human is subject to samsara as long as they live in ignorance.92 ennui: a feeling of utter weariness and dissatisfaction resulting from satiety, inactivity, or lack of interest; boredom.
Siddhartha feels this extreme, almost dangerous boredom after he leaves Kamaswami.  Hesse describes him to be full
of ennui, full of misery, full of death.93 besmirch: to make dirty; soil; to bring dishonor to; sully94 efface: to rub out, as from a surface; erase; wipe out, obliterate95 transitory: shortlived, fleeting, ephemeral (=> lasting only a day); the river in “Siddhartha” is the symbol of both the
transitory and the timeless.96 thwarted: blocked, checked, held back, prevented from …97 Vasudeva: in ancient legendary tales of India, in the Mahabharata (one of the two great Sanskrit epics) the word
often is said to mean “dwelling in all things” and may have been the the name of a tribal god.  The gods realized he
would be the father of the divine Krishna from Devaki, and they sounded the drums of heaven at his birth.  He married
seven sisters, four of whom immolated themselves with his corpse upon his death.  Having become identified with
Krishna and the all-pervading Vishnu; in Hindu mythology, Vaseduva is the patronym of Krishna, who, according to
one tradition, was a son of earthly Vasudeva.  In some epic passages of Vasudeva appears to be a title, to which other
princes challenge Krishna’s rights unsuccessfully.  The worshippers of Vasudeva, or later Krishna, formed one of the
eraliest theistic devotional movements or cults within Hinduism.  When they merged with other groups, namely the
Bhagavata, they represented the beginnings of modern Vaisnavism, or worship of Lord Vishnu.  One of the few
Vaishnavite temples in Bhubaneswar (Orissa) is referred to as Ananta Vasudeva.
                                                                                                                                                                                      98 funeral pyre: from Greek “pyr” = fire, a combustible heap of wood or other burning material for burning a dead
body as a funeral rite.  In the Buddhist religion cremation is the preferred rite and is inherited from Indian culture.  A
sermon is given on the nature of death and transience and on the deceased.  The ceremony is carried out with monks
and is followed by a meal.  The entire process often lasts a week and is sometimes celebrated on the anniversary as
well.  In Hinduism the funeral is also known as antyesti (antyeshti) and the rite is described as the 16th sacrament.
Cremation today is similar to what was prescribed in the Vedic tradition where, with some variations in the Rig-Veda,
the deceased is bathed, dressed in new clothes, and is usually burned near a river.  Strict rituals are are the rule and the
ceremony lasts three days.99 exhortation: a didactic address conveying advice or knowledge.  Advice, warnings, or recommendati ons with an
urgent tone regarding beliefs.100 gravity: here graveness, seriousness.101 Krishna: Sanskrit. meaning: “black” or “dark”; Krishna is a dark-complexioned Hindu god and one of the most
popular and accessible figures of Hindu religion..  Krishna is the eighth and most admired of the incarnations of
Vishnu, but is more important than Vishnu.  He is the son of the Vedic Devaki  and her husband Vasudeva.  In the
Upanishads he is referred to as a scholar.  He longed for a more personal than philosophical focus for religious
devotion.  As titled Vasudeva, he acts as a liberator from evil.  In dance he represents the passionate union with God.
He is sometimes represented as destroying the snake who poisoned the life-giving waters of the Yamuna River.  In
recent centuries Krishna has been worshipped primarily as a mischievous child and peerless lover.  In earlier centuries,
the didactic and heroic aspects were more prominent.102 Agni: the god of fire in Hindu; in Sanskrit literally meaning “fire”, of great importance especially in the Vedic
period.   He lies at the center of sacrifice as the messenger of god.  Agni mediates between humans and gods.  He
witnesses all sacred transactions, and sacrifices must pass through him (fire) to reach the divine.  He guards the south
east quadrant of the universe.  He acts as the source of knowledge for priests and is the enemy of darkness (Krishna).
He embodies youth and bestows immortality.103 veneration: the feeling of awe, respect, and reverence felt for someone held in high esteem.  Govinda feels this
regard for Siddhartha when he realizes he is the one and true Buddha, and he bows low and swallows his tears.
